Perspective
A New Era for Space Life Science: International
Standards for Space Omics Processing
Lindsay Rutter,1 Richard Barker,2 Daniela Bezdan,3 Henry Cope,4 Sylvain V. Costes,5 Lovorka Degoricija,6
Kathleen M. Fisch,7 Mariano I. Gabitto,8 Samrawit Gebre,6 Stefania Giacomello,9 Simon Gilroy,2 Stefan J. Green,10
Christopher E. Mason,11,12,13,14 Sigrid S. Reinsch,5 Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,15 Deanne M. Taylor,16,17
Jonathan M. Galazka,5,* Raul Herranz,18,* and Masafumi Muratani1,*
1Transborder Medical Research Center and Department of Genome Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8575, Japan
2Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
3Institute of Medical Virology and Epidemiology of Viral Diseases, University Hospital, Tubingen, Germany
4School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG8 1BB, UK
5Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
6KBR, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
7Center for Computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
8Flatiron Institute, Center for Computational Biology, Simons Foundation, New York, NY 10010, USA
9SciLifeLab, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 17165, Sweden
10Genome Research Core, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA
11Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA
12The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY
10021, USA
13The WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA
14The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA
15Ohio Musculoskeletal and Neurological Institute (OMNI), Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA
16Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
17Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
18Centro de Investigaciones Biolo´ gicas ‘‘Margarita Salas’’ (CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, Madrid 28040, Spain
*Correspondence: jonathan.m.galazka@nasa.gov (J.M.G.), r.herranz@csic.es (R.H.), muratani@md.tsukuba.ac.jp (M.M.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2020.100148
SUMMARY
Space agencies have announced plans for human missions to the Moon to prepare for Mars. However, the
space environment presents stressors that include radiation, microgravity, and isolation. Understanding how
these factors affect biology is crucial for safeand effective crewed space exploration. There is a need to develop
countermeasures, to adapt plants and microbes for nutrient sources and bioregenerative life support, and to
limit pathogen infection. Scientists across the world are conducting space omics experiments on model organ-
isms and, more recently, on humans. Optimal extraction of actionable scientiﬁc discoveries from these precious
datasets will only occur at the collective level with improved standardization. To address this shortcoming, we
established ISSOP (International Standards for Space Omics Processing), an international consortium of
THE BIGGER PICTURE
With the rise of commercial spaceﬂight and prospective human missions to Mars, a
wider health range of humans will enter space for longer spans and at higher exposure to environmental
stressors than ever before. Numerous adverse health effects have been observed in space, including bone
demineralization and skeletal muscle atrophy, among others. Scientists across the world are conducting space
omics studies to develop countermeasures for safe and effective crewed space missions. However, optimal
extraction of scientiﬁc insight from such data is contingent on improved standardization. In response, we
founded ISSOP (International Standards for Space Omics Processing), an international consortium of scientists
who aim to enhance guidelines between space biologists globally. This paper informs scientists and data sci-
entists from many ﬁelds about the challenges and future avenues of space omics and can serve as an introduc-
tory reference for new members in the space biology discipline.
Concept: Basic principles of a new
data science output observed and reported
ll
OPEN ACCESS
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

scientistswho aimtoenhancestandardguidelinesbetweenspacebiologistsat agloballevel.Hereweintroduce
our consortium and share past lessons learned and future challenges related to spaceﬂight omics.
BACKGROUND
Humankind has entered a new era of deep space exploration,
with space agencies announcing plans to put humans back
on the Moon in preparation for the ﬁrst crewed missions to
Mars. Radiation, microgravity, altered atmospheric gas compo-
sition, isolation, and diet changes are some of the known
stressors on humans in the space environment; these factors
are expected to increase with mission duration and distance
outside of low Earth orbit.1,2 Examples of adverse human
health effects during spaceﬂight include bone demineraliza-
tion,3 skeletal muscle atrophy,4 cardiovascular deconditioning,5
vestibular control,6 immune system suppression,7,8 and neuro-
ocular ailments.9 It is necessary to better understand how
spaceﬂight factors affect human health in order to develop
the countermeasures needed for safe and effective crewed
space missions. Moreover, critical elements of the space
exploration infrastructure, including food and medical supplies,
are insufﬁcient for prolonged missions.10
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
Twins Study further motivated the need for comprehensive, con-
sortium-based approaches to study the long-term effects of
spaceﬂight on humans.11 Here, nine research groups studied a
single data type in detail while a tenth group performed a
multi-omics synthesis to construct a systematic whole-body
layout of the changes. The study found alterations in numerous
data types, including telomere length, gene regulation, gut mi-
crobiome composition, body weight, carotid artery dimensions,
and serum metabolite proﬁles. While many of these changes
were transient, some persisted for over 6 months after return
to Earth.11
While the NASA Twins Study represents a step change in
space biology research, it is also anomalous. The vast majority
of space biology experiments and datasets are generated using
model organisms (Figure 1). Animal models are used to infer how
spaceﬂight affects humans; plant models are used to elicit how
crops can be cultivated in space for food and renewed oxygen
sources; and microbes are studied to understand how space af-
fects human microbiomes, plant-microbe interactions, and
environmental cleanliness, while also advancing the ﬁelds of
space
biotechnology,
planetary
protection,
and
astrobi-
ology.12,13 Speciﬁcally, the NASA Rodent Research (RR)14 and
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) Mouse Habitat
Unit (MHU)15,16 series are part of a long heritage of rodent exper-
iments in space; the zebraﬁsh, medaka ﬁsh, fruit ﬂy, and worm
have all been valuable models for studying the effects of micro-
gravity (mg), hypergravity, and space stressors using much larger
sample size17–24 and proper 1g controls in space via centrifuges
and on ground via microgravity simulators;25 plant models are
consistently ﬂown to investigate gravitropism26 and now food
production;27 and microbial models have been guests on
Apollo,28 Space Lab 1,29 the Space Shuttle,30 and the Interna-
tional Space Station (ISS),31 with recent interest turning toward
understanding the natural microbiomes of spaceships32,33 and
astronauts.34
In all cases, space biologists around the world are increasingly
reliant on omics approaches due to its ability to maximize the
knowledge
gained
from
rare
spaceﬂight
experiments
(Figure S1). This includes epigenomics, transcriptomics, prote-
omics, metagenomics, and metabolomics.11 While omics can
generate vast quantities of data, potentially paving the way for
successful space missions, optimal extraction of actionable sci-
entiﬁc insights from these complex data will only occur with
improved standardization and communication at the interna-
tional level.
In recent years, various consortiums have formed to address
the increasingly expensive, large, and complicated nature of
biological data.35–41 These committees implemented standards
that signiﬁcantly accelerated the scientiﬁc progress of their
respective communities. The space omics community remains
relatively new and can adopt successful frameworks from these
exemplar groups. At the same time, guidelines developed by
these groups cannot simply be replicated into the space omics
discipline. Conducting biological research in spaceﬂight pre-
sents unique technical and biological challenges that have
not been met before and will need to be speciﬁcally addressed
by the international space biology community to ensure its
success.
In response, we have formed a consortium called International
Standards for Space Omics Processing (ISSOP). Our members
are scientists who conduct space omics experiments funded
by multiple space agencies in Japan (JAXA), Europe (including
delegates from the European Space Agency [ESA] Space Omics
Topical Team42), and the United States (NASA). We bring exper-
tise related to the processing of space omics samples from hu-
mans, vertebrate, and invertebrate model organisms, plants, and
microbes; the implementation of multi-omics and systems
biology approaches in space biology; and the normalization of
spaceﬂight metadata. We are also informed with the latest devel-
opments across government, industry, and academia. Our
mission is to develop, share, and encourage sample-processing
standardization and metadata normalization of spaceﬂight
omics experiments to allow for a better harmonization of data
and increased gain of knowledge.
In this paper, we begin by describing examples of past lessons
learned from omics studies on model organisms in space. These
examples showcase the unique technical and biological chal-
lenges inherent to performing spaceﬂight omics and underline
the need for improved standardization in the discipline. We
then announce the current formation of ISSOP to address these
needs at the international level. We close with a brief section with
potential future avenues for ISSOP to bring standardized and
systematic science to the space omics ﬁeld.
PAST LESSONS LEARNED FROM SPACE OMICS WITH
MODEL ORGANISMS
There are a number of unique challenges during each stage of
a space omics experiment. In this section, we summarize
those challenges and any advances therein that have been
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
Perspective

achieved in recent years through model organism studies. We
journey through this section in roughly the same order of
stages that researchers conduct space omics research pro-
jects (Figure 2).
Planning and Experimental Phase
Limitations in Space, Time, and Finances
The space omics community faces novel technical difﬁculties
when planning spaceﬂight experiments. Basic challenges
include logistical limitations in space, time, and ﬁnances. First,
capacity limitations on orbiting platforms restrict the number
of experimental replicates and variables, especially for rodent
and plant studies. Small replicate numbers constrain statisti-
cal power and limit strain diversity. Genetically diverse crops
will be crucial to foster robust bioregenerative life support sys-
tems in long-term space missions; however, the majority of
plant species studied in space have been conﬁned to low
biomass species due to limited volume.43 Second, crew
time is exceptionally limited for experimental procedures in
spaceﬂight. In 2019, an hour of astronaut time was valued at
$17,500,44 while the mean hourly wage in the United States
for
biochemists
and
biophysicists
was
$52.01.45
These
numbers roughly indicate it can be more than 300 times
more expensive to perform experiments on orbit versus
terrestrially. It is difﬁcult to perform certain procedures on
the ISS due to the small crew size and the lack of laboratory
equipment and experience compared with what is common
in terrestrial laboratories. Third, repeating unsuccessful exper-
iments and following up successful experiments are both difﬁ-
cult due to logistical and ﬁnancial constraints and typically
face much longer waiting times compared with experiments
on the ground.43
Hardware and Housing
Biological experiments during spaceﬂight are rarely performed
using standard ground equipment. Developing special hardware
and housing technology that can operate in spaceﬂight condi-
tions is an ongoing challenge. In the past few decades, several
space research platforms for animal and plant physiology have
been developed.46–49 Alongside these engineering advances, it
has become clear that the hardware itself and how it is employed
in experimental design must be carefully standardized and itera-
tively improved to mitigate unintentional confounding factors as
they become better known.
For example, the standard rodent vivarium cages used in
ground studies are unsuitable in microgravity. One hardware
design that has proved to be an effective platform for rodent
studies during spaceﬂight is the NASA Animal Enclosure Model
(AEM).49 A recent meta-study compared AEM ground controls
and vivarium ground controls by examining all datasets in the
NASA GeneLab database that had samples for both condi-
tions.50 The authors applied an unbiased systems biology
approach that revealed substantial transcriptional differences
in ground control rodents when only the habitat was changed.50
In particular, a mild hypoxic phenotype was observed in the AEM
condition, possibly due to its intentional design to intake ambient
air, thereby passively intaking higher CO2 concentrations imple-
mented to match the spaceﬂight environment.50 Importantly,
increased CO2 levels may cause a decrease in cognitive scores
and an increase in headaches in humans.51,52 Overall, this study
underlined the critical need for well-designed ground control
PROS
•
Fast life cycle
•
Cost-eﬀecƟve; can be ﬂown as seeds
•
Readily geneƟcally engineered
•
Rich literature and mutant libraries
•
Only small biomass species studied due 
to limited growth space
•
Must properly preserve samples
•
Need special housing hardware
MODEL ORGANISMS
CONS
•
Need trained astronauts
•
Limited number and diversity of humans on ISS
•
Limited types of experiments due to ethics
•
Lack of appropriate controls
CONS
EXAMPLE USES
•
Response of muscle adaptaƟon and
EXAMPLE USES
•
ProkaryoƟc organism
•
Response of muscle adaptaƟon and developmental
•
Complements research on D. melanogaster
EXAMPLE 
USES
EXAMPLE 
USES
EXAMPLE
USES
•
Response of 
growth, pathogenicity, 
and anƟmicrobial 
resistance to space
•
Cataloging and analyzing
microbes present on the ISS
•
Human microbiomes, plant-
microbial interacƟons, 
environmental cleanliness, space 
biotechnology, planetary protecƟon, 
and astrobiology
•
Source of food,
medicine and nutrients
•
Psychological support
•
Life support (replenish air
and ﬁlter water)
CONS
PROS
•
Drug tesƟng
•
TesƟng of geneƟc mutants
(both have large sample size, short generaƟons,
cost-eﬀecƟve, limited space needs, limited
crew Ɵme)
•
Well characterized genome and
bioinformaƟcs tools
•
Microscopic
•
Need temperature control
•
Large evoluƟonary distance
with other metazoans
biology to space
•
Complements research on C. elegans 
(both have large sample size, short
generaƟons, cost-eﬀecƟve, limited 
space needs, limited crew Ɵme)
developmental biology to space
•
Response of immune systems and oxidaƟve 
stress pathways to space
•
Many mutants, each with large 
sample sizes from the same 
geneƟc background
•
Complex nervous system
PROS
•
Response of 
•
Focus on musculoskeletal, 
cardiovascular and immune
systems
mammalian models at
molecular, physiological, 
PROS
•
Moderate to low number of 
individuals per experiment
•
More closely resembles humans
•
BeƩer controls
CONS
•
Tight regulatory needs
•
Need to properly preserve/freeze specimen
•
Need rodent habitat
•
Response of humans 
at the molecular, physiological, 
and systemic levels to space
PROS
•
Best model to understand how space aﬀects
humans
•
Same geneƟc background
•
Response of embryonic development to space
•
Response of small vertebrate models at development,
disease, Ɵssue funcƟon and cell biology levels to space
•
Discriminate unloading from gravisensing/orientaƟon
•
Large number of embryos from each breeding;
large number of mutant lines and transgenics
•
Can reproduce in space
•
Transparent embryos to see organ
development
•
Well studied geneƟc model with signiﬁcant
homology to humans
CONS
•
Have not ﬂown many Ɵmes
•
Limited number of total samples
•
Habitat is quite complicated
and  systemic levels to space
•
Aging, behavior and reproducƟon in space
CONS
•
Large evoluƟonary distance 
with other metazoans
•
Hard cuƟcle, asynchronous
ﬂight muscles
PROS
EXAMPLE
USES
PROS
•
Large sample sizes
•
Simple models, rapid replicaƟon cycles
•
Ease of geneƟc manipulaƟon, cost eﬀecƟve
•
No housing hardware needed
CONS
EXAMPLE USES
Figure 1. Example Uses, Pros, and Cons of Various Model Organisms Used in Space Omics Experiments
ll
OPEN ACCESS
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
3
Perspective

experiments in order to address confounders that might other-
wise lead to incorrect conclusions about the omics effects of
spaceﬂight, something that has also been observed in ﬂies culti-
vated in space.25
Plants also require special hardware designs for spaceﬂight,
several of which have been used enough to understand that the
hardware itself introduces extraneous variables. For example,
Biological Research in Canisters (BRIC) hardware, which required
no power and only limited crew time, was employed in numerous
astrobotany experiments and found to have several shortcom-
ings. The hardware itself reduced plant endodermal cell size,
partially due to etiolated response to its dark environment.53 Simi-
larly, the BRIC Petri Dish Fixation Unit (BRIC-PDFU) hardware in-
duces stress-related changes in the transcriptome and proteome
of Arabidopsis seedlings, highlighting the continued need for iter-
ative hardware revisions henceforth.54
The spaceﬂight community redevelops hardware not only to
improve design but also to add new features that conserve
time and effort for crew members. These features include real-
time imaging, ground commanding, and automated software.
New features are also added to better differentiate between
the combinatorial effects of living in space. For example, in
contrast to the NASA BRIC and BRIC-PDFU platforms, both
the European KUBIK incubator and the JAXA Multiple Artiﬁcial-
Gravity Research System (MARS) platforms provide 1g in-ﬂights
controls.15 These controls may mitigate the risk of falsely identi-
fying omics results as responsive to microgravity exposure when
they are instead relevant to other spaceﬂight variables.
Nonetheless, we note that, as is the case with most innovative
spacecraft housing units, these platforms themselves introduce
their own confounding inﬂuences. In particular, gravity gradients
appear across the rotor system and sample positions do not
experience the same gravity force. Given that small differences
in partial gravity exposure cause large transcriptional proﬁles
changes in plants,55,56 it is paramount for plant biologists who
use these platforms to publish metadata that include both nom-
inal partial g and real partial g for each sample position.
The use of reliable 1g controls both on Earth and in orbit is
greatly acknowledged.24,57,58 A large variety of ground-based
simulation systems55 can be used together to dissect the differ-
ential contribution of each confounding factor introduced by
spaceﬂight or hardware requirements. Microgravity simulators
include 2D clinostats, random positioning machines (RPMs),
rotating wall vessels (RWVs), and diamagnetic levitation.59
Figure 2. Roadmap of the Unique Challenges and Solutions during Each Stage of a Space Omics Experiment
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
Perspective

Each of these simulators brings speciﬁc artifacts; for instance,
clinostats introduce centrifugal accelerations and vibrations
and diamagnetic levitation affects cell components differently
based on magnetic susceptibility.59 For these reasons, consis-
tent terminology must be used and standards must be proposed
for different simulators and different modes of operation.59
We note that commercial platforms are increasingly being
contracted for spaceﬂight biological experiments, including Tan-
goLabs (Space Tango, Lexington, KY), NanoLabs (NanoRacks,
Houston, TX), and ICE Cubes Facilities (Space Application Ser-
vices, Sint-Stevens-Woluwe, Belgium). To improve standardiza-
tion and share lessons learned, communication will be increas-
ingly crucial between the academic, government, and industry
sectors developing and improving upon hardware designs.
Consistent metadata collection about hardware used will also
be crucial for informed interpretation of space omics data.
Sample Collection and Storage
Sample Collection
Due in part to limitations in crew time and ﬁnances, inconsis-
tencies have arisen in how samples are obtained for analysis.
For example, in some rodent experiments, animals are eutha-
nized in space (‘‘ISS terminal’’) and either preserved as whole
frozen carcasses (‘‘ISS terminal frozen return’’) for eventual
dissection on Earth or dissected immediately by astronauts
(‘‘ISS terminal dissected return’’). Alternatively, animals can be
returned to Earth alive for euthanasia and dissection (‘‘live animal
return’’). Each method has its strengths and weaknesses: While
ISS-terminal approaches ﬁx spaceﬂight responses directly, live
animal return saves the time and specialized training astronauts
would need to perform ﬁne anatomical dissection on the ISS and
ensure that these procedures are instead performed by profes-
sional technicians on Earth. Live animal return also allows scien-
tists to study the offspring of returned spaceﬂight mice and to
examine recovery to Earth conditions. On the downside, live an-
imal return is confounded by exerted forces during reentry, reac-
climation to Earth conditions after splashdown and before
dissection, and circadian rhythm differences.
Sample Preservation
Adequate preservation of samples aboard the ISS is a continuing
challenge and a hindrance to capturing unchanged biological re-
sponses to the orbital environment. Without access to liquid nitro-
gen, the current tissue freezing standard on the ISS is 80C slow
freezing. Unfortunately, NASA Rodent Research-1 (RR-1) mis-
sions revealed that space mouse gene expression analysis may
not be reliable with slow freezing.14 Indeed, slow freezing of
mouse carcasses on orbit for eventual dissection on Earth (ISS
terminal frozen return samples) showed large gene expression
changes when compared with mice dissected by astronauts in
orbit (ISS terminal dissected return samples). This appeared to
be exacerbated by the use of poly(A) enrichment-based RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) protocol, and could be alleviated by the
use of a ribodepletion-based approach and by snap-freezing car-
casses in liquid nitrogen.60 As a result, the Rapid Freeze hardware
was recently developed for use on the ISS. The device can freeze
mouse tissues (Glovebox freezer) and whole carcasses (Cryochil-
ler) at rates similar to those attained with liquid nitrogen immer-
sion. Studies are ongoing to determine how this new hardware
compares with current ISS standard methods.
RNAlater consists of quaternary ammonium sulfates and ce-
sium sulfates that denature and deactivate ribonucleases to pre-
vent sample degradation. It is one ﬁxative that has been widely
used in space omics because it efﬁciently preserves nucleic
acids and is deemed safe in the orbital environment. However,
a secondary control study found that numerous genes identiﬁed
in spaceﬂight experiments exhibit more pronounced differential
expression induced by RNAlater than by microgravity.61 The ﬁx-
ation process is not rapid enough to prevent a response to the
preservative in plants or invertebrates. Under normal circum-
stances, parallel ﬁxation of treatment and control samples would
account for the preservation effects. However, spaceﬂight is by
no means a normal circumstance: it is likely that the ﬁxation pro-
cess is markedly altered in microgravity, which induces sweep-
ing alterations to structural components of plants and inverte-
brates
and
differences
in
ﬂuid
dynamics.
Ultimately,
transcriptomic experiments performed aboard the ISS should
preferentially use snap-freezing preservation. In the absence of
snap-freezing capabilities, experimentalists should examine
the overlap in response to RNAlater and their experimental treat-
ments to eliminate potential ﬁxative-induced transcriptome
events.61,62
Data Curation and Distribution
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project signiﬁcantly enhanced
our understanding of complex biology with its carefully curated
and publicly available multi-omics database.36 In order to un-
ravel how biology responds to space factors, the space omics
community needs to capture this spirit and construct an analo-
gous database tailored to the unique characteristics of space
omics data. NASA GeneLab is the ﬁrst comprehensive space
omics database that aims to optimize scientiﬁc return from
spaceﬂight and ground simulation experiments funded by multi-
ple space agencies around the world.63 The repository currently
maintains more than 300 transcriptomic, epigenomic, proteo-
mic, metabolomic, and metagenomic datasets from plant, ani-
mal, and microbial space experiments. Users can upload, down-
load, store, and analyze spaceﬂight-relevant omics data in an
open-access manner.
GeneLab complies with FAIR (ﬁndability, accessibility, inter-
operability, and reusability) principles64,65 and houses raw, inter-
mediate, and fully processed data ﬁles. This renders the data
accessible to citizen scientists and scientists at every level.
Users can fully reproduce each step of the analysis pipeline
and reanalyze data using their preferred bioinformatics tools
starting from any step in the pipeline. As raw and intermediate
ﬁles lack interpretable biological meaning, processed data ﬁles
contain user-friendly menus that allow users to easily explore
statistical comparisons and visualizations between data in order
to generate new space biology hypotheses at high and intercon-
nected levels.66
The power of a database is greater than the sum of its individ-
ual datasets, but only if its individual datasets can be cross-
examined in intelligent ways that assist with pattern discovery.
Metadata are datasets that provide information about other da-
tasets and hence are the bedrock of interconnecting datasets in
informed manners. For this reason, implementation of best prac-
tices for metadata is just as important as for the datasets them-
selves.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
5
Perspective

GeneLab links critical metadata to each dataset. Metadata
cover numerous factors that may present confounding vari-
ables during space omics experiments: biology factors (such
as age, gender, strain, and ecotype), lifestyle factors (such as
diet, exercise, and light cycle), experimental design factors
(such as hardware and preﬂight and postﬂight exposure to
stressors), sample-processing factors (such as preservation
methods and library preparation methods), and spaceﬂight fac-
tors (such as gravity, atmospheric pressure, temperature, and
ionizing radiation). Overall, metadata can be systematically
examined to create robust networks that predict confounding
variables and eventually determine additional experimental
and engineering improvement areas for spaceﬂight omics
studies.67
Metadata protocols continue to be reﬁned in the space biology
discipline. For example, ISS environmental metadata (such as
CO2, temperature, and radiation levels) are now integrated in
space omics data.68 Dosimeters are not typically incorporated
in the housing units of space omics experiments; hence, dosage
exposure for study samples must be extrapolated from sur-
rounding dosimeters.68 Meticulous metadata standardization ef-
forts will continue to evolve and solve such challenges. External
tools are also being developed to facilitate metadata reproduc-
ibility and discoverability. The Gilroy Astrobiology Team at the
University of Wisconsin developed a metadata visualization
API for the GeneLab platform called TOAST (Test of Arabidopsis
Space Transcriptome) and a cross-species transcriptional
viewer (NASA GeneLab Cross Kingdom Database) that uses iter-
ative approaches to assist users with discovering common gene
clusters among space omics datasets.68
As much as possible, space biologists employ standardized
ontological vocabularies accepted by the larger scientiﬁc com-
munity through the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations
(OBI). However, given the unprecedented nature of space
biology, terminology must sometimes be extended from the
OBI. This has been the case especially for radiobiology and
space radiation terms. The addition of new ontology terms
must be done carefully in manners that support controlled inte-
gration between datasets and metadata sources.69
Normalizing metadata is another enormous manual effort,
sometimes requiring interviewing principal investigators and
perusing publications to procure critical metadata. With growing
volumes of incoming space omics datasets, this ambitious effort
cannot be scaled.69 Going forward, submission portals can be
created to increase automatic curation, which has already
been proved relatively successful in non-spaceﬂight applica-
tions.69 Algorithms can guide data submitters to deposit crucial
metadata and even provide explanations for why certain meta-
data are essential. Successfully relaying the importance of space
omics confounders to researchers will improve their metadata
submission adherence, thereby increasing the automation of
metadata curation and the reliability of cross-data studies.
Recent groups have indeed demonstrated the power of inte-
grating multiple datasets from the GeneLab database to elicit
global systemic responses to the space environment.50 Future
studies can similarly leverage the database and its thorough
metadata to obtain the larger sample sizes and stronger statisti-
cal powers needed to further identify salient factors affecting
space-ﬂown organisms.
Sample Sharing
Deciphering fundamental molecular responses to space will
likely not be achieved by a single research group. Sample-
sharing schemes must be honed to maximize discoverability
and reproducibility between researchers in the space omics
discipline. To this end, sharing a common biobank and sam-
ple-processing facility is ideal. An organized, navigable biobank
can allow researchers to determine whether tissues of interest
are already available from previous studies and avoid con-
ducting redundant, resource-consuming experiments in space.
A central sample-processing facility can prevent batch effects
that would otherwise be introduced in a multiple-facility conﬁgu-
ration. The common facility can generate high-quality data using
standard operating procedures (SOPs) performed by specially
trained laboratory operators and robotic workstations. Overall,
this framework would be in congruence with successful multi-
omics endeavors, such as the TCGA project, where each type
of omics was managed by a single center.36
Fortunately, space omics-sharing schemes are already imple-
mented in Japan and the United States. A typical JAXA mouse
live animal return study consists of 12 mice, producing more
than 30 different tissue types across multiple omics assays
that are then shared by more than 10 primary investigators. Ge-
nomics datasets from spaceﬂight mice are processed in a com-
mon laboratory at the University of Tsukuba that implements
automated sample processing using LabDroids.70 In the United
States, unused frozen spaceﬂight samples from previous exper-
iments are often archived in the NASA Biospecimen Sharing Pro-
gram of the Life Sciences Data Archive. GeneLab scientists at
the sample-processing laboratory process these samples and
generate omics data using standardized methods for data repro-
ducibility. While ESA does not have its own sample-sharing
schemes, it does encourage multinational spaceﬂight experi-
ments with sample sharing between European researchers and
it does participate bilaterally with JAXA and NASA schemes.
As the discipline forges onward, valuable sharing schemes for
these rare and costly biological specimens returned from orbit
should continue to be perfected.
CURRENT NEED FOR A GLOBAL CONSORTIUM: ISSOP
With an increasing reliance on and promise of omics technolo-
gies when properly standardized, and with different countries
providing speciﬁc expertise, we have formed to create guide-
lines for space omics data with input from scientists at the global
level. We envision that, as the ﬁeld of human space omics ma-
tures, our guidelines can be readily extended from animal
models to humans and to speciﬁcally allow for translatable infer-
ence and comparison between animal model data and human
data. Our latest protocols will be available on our consortium
website (https://issop.space) and GitHub (https://github.com/
ISSOP) as they are developed and continuously updated.
Here we announce the inception of the ISSOP consortium.
ISSOP is a portmanteau of the abbreviations ISS and SOP. We
are an international consortium of scientists with a 3-fold mission
statement. First, we develop, share, and encourage sample-pro-
cessing standardization and metadata normalization of space-
ﬂight omics experiments. Second, we aim to optimize the condi-
tions for scientists and the general public to derive valid
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
Perspective

hypotheses from these precious data by reducing confounding
factors and increasing interoperability at the global level. Third,
our standardization efforts are crucial for understanding the ef-
fects of spaceﬂight on biological organisms and preparing the in-
ternational community toward developing safe and effective
crewed space exploration beyond low Earth orbit. Our objec-
tives, deliverables, and expected impacts are listed in Table 1.
ISSOP meets regularly virtually and at the American Society
for Gravitational and Space Research (ASGSR) conference,
where we can communicate latest standardization guidelines
to and from various industry representatives. Our collaborative
meetings are designed to identify mechanisms to increase the
impact of future space omics experiments while sharing new
data and analysis methods. We invite interested readers to con-
tact ISSOP with inquiries or suggestions at issop@issop.space.
Corresponding authors in the current paper can also be con-
tacted with questions speciﬁc to each geographical region within
ISSOP (R.H. for Europe, M.M. for Japan, and J.M.G. for the
United States).
FUTURE AVENUES
In this paper, we discussed the challenges of performing omics
experiments in spaceﬂight on model organisms. An international
consortium of scientists who bring expertise in space omics
studies across a breadth of assay types and model organisms
can best advance the ﬁeld in a multifaceted manner. In future
work, ISSOP can develop space omics recommendations
across individual assays, including proteomics, metabolomics,
metagenomics, transcriptomics, and epigenomics. Guidelines
can also be developed for lesser-known but promising molecular
biology laboratory techniques. For instance, JAXA and NASA
projects have recently started to utilize laser microdissection
(LMD) and spatial transcriptomics respectively for data collec-
tion at the tissue-part-speciﬁc level as opposed to simply the tis-
sue-speciﬁc level. ISSOP members who participate in these
studies can develop standardization protocols in the context of
space omics. Best practices can also be proposed for various
organisms. For example, as mentioned previously, physical lim-
itations on orbit restrict sample sizes in certain organisms,
including plants. ISSOP members with expertise in astrobotany
can provide guidance on standards to maximize information
from small numbers of samples during spaceﬂight. Digitization
of sample handling with advanced robotics will be one of the
important components for future remote experiments and proj-
ect sharing. In total, ISSOP can present diverse and balanced
guidelines for conducting space omics experiments across a
range of assay types and model organisms; these guidelines
can include quantitative and qualitative information about data
collection, data extraction, library preparation, quality control,
sample preservation, and sequencing parameters. It may be
possible to eventually consolidate this information into a proto-
col decision tree algorithm that can provide standardized recom-
mendations to principal investigators based on their organisms
and assays of interest.
The challenges delineated in this paper will be further intensi-
ﬁed as we leap into an age of human space omics. Commercial
spaceﬂight will induce a wider health range of humans entering
space while future long-term deep space missions will expose
humans to more intense environmental stressors for longer dura-
tions than ever before. Fine-tuning the space telemedicine ﬁeld
will be necessary for these ambitious frontiers and will best be
achieved with the addition of omics as a standard measures pro-
gram. Pioneering crewed missions to Mars will likely require in-
ternational input due to complexities in the technology and cul-
tural ethics of working with human subjects.71 ISSOP may be
uniquely positioned to leverage lessons learned thus far from
model organisms to develop an informed framework early on
that can maximize scientiﬁc discovery and minimize ethical
problems for an upcoming era of human space omics. Compel-
lingly, careful standardization of space omics data through IS-
SOP may pave the way for cell space atlases72,73 and precision
Table 1. Objectives, Deliverables, and Expected Impacts
of ISSOP
Community
objectives
(1) Inform space biologists of recommended
guidelines for space omics experiments; (2)
Enhance information exchange between space
biologists at the global level; (3) Reach a more
diverse community of scientists and citizen
scientists; (4) Incentivize engagement toward
space omics and metadata standardization in the
space biology research community; (5) Invite
researchers committed to these values to join our
efforts
Tangible
deliverables
(1) Publish and routinely update our recommended
sample-processing guidelines in a free and public
repository; (2) Publish and routinely update lessons
we have learned about space omics experiments in
a free and public repository; (3) Upload key raw
ﬁles, intermediate ﬁles, and ﬁnal ﬁles using
transparent and standardized data analysis
pipelines for each dataset in the NASA GeneLab
database; (4) Implement critical metadata
standards for all datasets in the NASA GeneLab
database
Shorter-term
expected
impacts
(1) Reduction in confounding factors and
promotion of harmonization and interoperability
between space omics datasets; (2) Increased
accuracy when comparing between data, including
historic spaceﬂight data with recently generated
data, spaceﬂight analogue data with actual
spaceﬂight data, and model organism data with
human data; (3) Prevention of space biology
researchers making the same expensive mistakes
that have already been learned from other
researchers; (4) Democratized access to priceless
space omics data in various ﬁle formats accessible
to both citizen scientists and seasoned
bioinformaticians alike; (5) Accelerated derivation
of valid hypotheses and novel discoveries related
to the effects of space conditions on biological
organisms
Longer-term
expected
impacts
(1) Improvements in hardware and software
technology for future space omics experiments; (2)
Advances in biological technologies, therapeutics,
and countermeasures to support life in space; (3)
Advances in biological technologies and
therapeutics applicable to improvements of life
on Earth
ll
OPEN ACCESS
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
7
Perspective

spaceﬂight medicine74–78 that will critically improve the safety of
humans traveling through space.
Here we have introduced ISSOP as an international consortium
that can prime researchers to extract as much actionable insight
as possible from space omics data through improved standardi-
zation, altogether beneﬁting upcoming trailblazing space missions
during this critical period. This paper is intended to inform scien-
tists and data scientists across a wide spectrum of disciplines
about the challenges and future directions of the exciting ﬁeld of
space omics. This paper can also serve as an introductory refer-
ence for students and new members in the space omics and
larger space biology discipline. We invite interested readers to
learn more about ISSOP through our webpage. Satellite ISSOP
papers will follow with more detailed focuses on speciﬁc realms
of standard space omics processing, all intended to improve
our understanding of the omics effects of spaceﬂight so humanity
can reach new worlds safely.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
patter.2020.100148.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Colin P.S. Kruse at Los Alamos National Laboratory for contributions
about astrobotany challenges, Valery Boyko at NASA GeneLab for project
conceptualization and ﬁgure creation, and Amanda M. Saravia-Butler at
NASA GeneLab for contributions about sample preservation challenges. Euro-
pean (D.B., H.C., N.J.S., R.H., and S. Giacomello) contribution is supported by
ESA Topical Team ‘‘Space Omics: Towards an integrated ESA/NASA –omics
database
for
spaceﬂight
and
ground
facilities
experiments’’
grant
4000131202/20/NL/PG/pt to R.H. S. Giacomello is supported by Formas grant
2017-01066_3. H.C. is supported by the Horizon Centre for Doctoral Training
at the University of Nottingham (UKRI grant no. EP/S023305/1) and by the
NASA GeneLab Animal Analysis Working Group. N.J.S. is supported by the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NNX15AL16G). NASA Gene-
Lab members (J.M.G., S.V.C., S.S.R., L.D., S. Gebre) are supported by the
NASA Space Biology program within the NASA Science Mission Directorate’s
(SMD) Biological and Physical Sciences (BPS) Division. R.B. and S. Gilroy are
supported by NASA (80NSSC19K0132). L.R. and M.M. represent the Omics
Subgroup of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI
funding
group
Living
in
Space
and
are
supported
by
JP15K21745,
JP15H05940, and JP20H03234. L.R. is supported by JSPS postdoctoral
fellowship P20382. D.T. is supported by the Department of Biomedical and
Health Informatics and The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Research Insti-
tute. K.F. is supported by the UC San Diego Department of Medicine and Na-
tional Institutes of Health, grant UL1TR001442 of CTSA (Clinical and Transla-
tional Science Awards). C.E.M. is funded from the WorldQuant Foundation,
The Pershing Square Sohn Cancer Research Alliance, and the National Insti-
tutes of Health (R01MH117406). S.V.C., J.M.G., and S.S.R. are supported
by the GeneLab Project at NASA Ames Research Center, through NASA’s
BPS division in the SMD; any use of trade names is for descriptive purposes
only and does not imply endorsement by the US Government. C.E.M. is a
co-Founder of Onegevity Health; D.B. is co-Founder of Analog LLC and Poppy
Health Inc.; M.M. is an employee of LSI Medience Corporation through cross-
appointment system of University of Tsukuba and Research Advisor of Ro-
botic Biology Institute Inc.; and S. Giacomello is a scientiﬁc advisor of 10x Ge-
nomics Inc.
REFERENCES
1. Furukawa, S., Nagamatsu, A., Nenoi, M., Fujimori, A., Kakinuma, S., Kat-
sube, T., Wang, B., Tsuruoka, C., Shirai, T., Nakamura, A.J., et al. (2020).
Space radiation biology for ‘‘living in space’’. Biomed. Res. Int. 2020,
4703286.
2. Institute of Medicine (2008). Review of NASA’s Human Research Program
Evidence Books (The National Academies Press). https://doi.org/10.
17226/12261.
3. LeBlanc, A., Shackelford, L., and Schneider, V. (1998). Future human bone
research in space. Bone 22, 113S–116S.
4. Vandenburgh, H., Chromiak, J., Shansky, J., Del Tatto, M., and Lemaire, J.
(1999). Space travel directly induces skeletal muscle atrophy. FASEB J.
13, 1031–1038.
5. Bungo, M.W., Charles, J.B., and Johnson, P.C., Jr. (1985). Cardiovascular
deconditioning during space ﬂight and the use of saline as a countermea-
sure to orthostatic intolerance. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 56, 985–990.
6. Morita, H., Kaji, H., Ueta, Y., and Abe, C. (2020). Understanding vestibular-
related physiological functions could provide clues on adapting to a new
gravitational environment. J. Physiol. Sci. 70, 17.
7. Konstantinova, I.V. (1991). Immune resistance of man in space ﬂights.
Acta Astronaut. 23, 123–127.
8. Akiyama, T., Horie, K., Hinoi, E., Hiraiwa, M., Kato, A., Maekawa, Y., Taka-
hashi, A., and Furukawa, S. (2020). How does spaceﬂight affect the ac-
quired immune system? NPJ Microgravity 6, 14.
9. Lee, A.G., Mader, T.H., Gibson, C.R., Brunstetter, T.J., and Tarver, W.J.
(2018). Space ﬂight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS). Eye
(Lond) 32, 1164–1167.
10. Douglas, G.L., Zwart, S.R., and Smith, S.M. (2020). Space food for
thought: challenges and considerations for food and nutrition on explora-
tion missions. J. Nutr. 150, 2242, https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/nxaa188.
11. Garrett-Bakelman, F.E., Darshi, M., Green, S.J., Gur, R.C., Lin, L., Macias,
B.R., McKenna, M.J., Meydan, C., Mishra, T., Nasrini, J., et al. (2019). The
NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis of a year-long human
spaceﬂight. Science 364, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau8650.
12. Ott, M., Pierson, D., Shirakawa, M., Tanigaki, F., Hida, M., Yamazaki, T.,
Shimazu, T., and Ishioka, N. (2014). Space habitation and microbiology:
status and roadmap of space agencies. Microbes Environ. 29, 239–242.
13. Yamaguchi, N., Roberts, M., Castro, S., Oubre, C., Makimura, K., Leys, N.,
Grohmann, E., Sugita, T., Ichijo, T., and Nasu, M. (2014). Microbial moni-
toring of crewed habitats in space-current status and future perspectives.
Microbes Environ. 29, 250–260.
14. Choi, S.Y., Saravia-Butler, A., Shirazi-Fard, Y., Leveson-Gower, D., Sto-
dieck, L.S., Cadena, S.M., Beegle, J., Solis, S., Ronca, A., and Globus,
R.K. (2020). Validation of a new rodent experimental system to investigate
consequences of long duration space habitation. Sci. Rep. 10, 2336.
15. Shiba, D., Mizuno, H., Yumoto, A., Shimomura, M., Kobayashi, H., Morita,
H., Shimbo, M., Hamada, M., Kudo, T., Shinohara, M., et al. (2017). Devel-
opment of new experimental platform ‘‘MARS’’-Multiple Artiﬁcial-gravity
Research System-to elucidate the impacts of micro/partial gravity on
mice. Sci. Rep. 7, 10837.
16. Matsuda, C., Kato, T., Inoue-Suzuki, S., Kikuchi, J., Ohta, T., Kagawa, M.,
Hattori, M., Kobayashi, H., Shiba, D., Shirakawa, M., et al. (2019). Dietary
intervention of mice using an improved Multiple Artiﬁcial-gravity Research
System (MARS) under artiﬁcial 1. NPJ Microgravity 5, 16.
17. Hateley, S., Hosamani, R., Bhardwaj, S.R., Pachter, L., and Bhattacharya,
S. (2016). Transcriptomic response of Drosophila melanogaster pupae
developed in hypergravity. Genomics 108, 158–167.
18. Hosamani, R., Leib, R., Bhardwaj, S.R., Adams, C.M., and Bhattacharya,
S. (2016). Elucidating the ‘‘gravome’’: quantitative proteomic proﬁling of
the response to chronic hypergravity in Drosophila. J. Proteome Res.
15, 4165–4175.
19. Ikenaga, M., Yoshikawa, I., Kojo, M., Ayaki, T., Ryo, H., Ishizaki, K., Kato,
T., Yamamoto, H., and Hara, R. (1997). Mutations induced in Drosophila
during space ﬂight. Biol. Sci. Space 11, 346–350.
20. Marcu, O., Lera, M.P., Sanchez, M.E., Levic, E., Higgins, L.A., Shmygel-
ska, A., Fahlen, T.F., Nichol, H., and Bhattacharya, S. (2011). Innate im-
mune responses of Drosophila melanogaster are altered by spaceﬂight.
PLoS One 6, e15361.
21. Ogneva, I.V., Belyakin, S.N., and Sarantseva, S.V. (2016). The develop-
ment of Drosophila Melanogaster under different duration space ﬂight
and subsequent adaptation to earth gravity. PLoS One 11, e0166885.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
Perspective

22. Chatani, M., Mantoku, A., Takeyama, K., Abduweli, D., Sugamori, Y., Aoki,
K., Ohya, K., Suzuki, H., Uchida, S., Sakimura, T., et al. (2015). Micro-
gravity promotes osteoclast activity in medaka ﬁsh reared at the interna-
tional space station. Sci. Rep. 5, 14172.
23. Murata, Y., Yasuda, T., Watanabe-Asaka, T., Oda, S., Mantoku, A., Take-
yama, K., Chatani, M., Kudo, A., Uchida, S., Suzuki, H., et al. (2015). His-
tological and transcriptomic analysis of adult Japanese medaka sampled
onboard the international space station. PLoS One 10, e0138799.
24. Higashibata, A., Hashizume, T., Nemoto, K., Higashitani, N., Etheridge, T.,
Mori, C., Harada, S., Sugimoto, T., Szewczyk, N.J., Baba, S.A., et al.
(2016). Microgravity elicits reproducible alterations in cytoskeletal and
metabolic gene and protein expression in space-ﬂown. NPJ Microgravity
2, 15022.
25. Herranz, R., Bengurı´a, A., Lava´ n, D.A., Lo´ pez-Vidriero, I., Gasset, G., Jav-
ier Medina, F., van Loon, J.J., and Marco, R. (2010). Spaceﬂight-related
suboptimal conditions can accentuate the altered gravity response of
Drosophila transcriptome. Mol. Ecol. 19, 4255–4264.
26. Vandenbrink, J.P., and Kiss, J.Z. (2019). Plant responses to gravity. Semin.
Cell Dev. Biol. 92, 122–125.
27. Khodadad, C.L.M., Hummerick, M.E., Spencer, L.E., Dixit, A.R., Richards,
J.T., Romeyn, M.W., Smith, T.M., Wheeler, R.M., and Massa, G.D. (2020).
Microbiological and nutritional analysis of lettuce crops grown on the inter-
national space station. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 199.
28. Berry, D., and Volz, P.A. (1979). Phosphate uptake in Saccharomyces cer-
evisiae Hansen wild type and phenotypes exposed to space ﬂight irradia-
tion. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 38, 751–753.
29. Sulzman, F.M., Ellman, D., Fuller, C.A., Moore-Ede, M.C., and Wassmer,
G. (1984). Neurospora circadian rhythms in space: a reexamination of
the endogenous-exogenous question. Science 225, 232–234.
30. Crabbe´ , A., Nielsen-Preiss, S.M., Woolley, C.M., Barrila, J., Buchanan, K.,
McCracken, J., Inglis, D.O., Searles, S.C., Nelman-Gonzalez, M.A., Ott,
C.M., et al. (2013). Spaceﬂight enhances cell aggregation and random
budding in Candida albicans. PLoS One 8, e80677.
31. Morrison, M.D., Fajardo-Cavazos, P., and Nicholson, W.L. (2019). Com-
parison of transcriptome proﬁles from two separate missions to the Inter-
national Space Station. NPJ Microgravity 5, 1.
32. Singh, N.K., Wood, J.M., Karouia, F., and Venkateswaran, K. (2018). Suc-
cession and persistence of microbial communities and antimicrobial resis-
tance genes associated with International Space Station environmental
surfaces. Microbiome 6, 204.
33. Singh, N.K., Bezdan, D., Checinska Sielaff, A., Wheeler, K., Mason, C.E.,
and Venkateswaran, K. (2018). Multi-drug resistant Enterobacter bugan-
densis species isolated from the International Space Station and compar-
ative genomic analyses with human pathogenic strains. BMC Microbiol.
18, 175.
34. Voorhies, A.A., Mark Ott, C., Mehta, S., Pierson, D.L., Crucian, B.E., Feive-
son, A., Oubre, C.M., Torralba, M., Moncera, K., Zhang, Y., et al. (2019).
Study of the impact of long-duration space missions at the International
Space Station on the astronaut microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 9911.
35. MetaSUB International Consortium (2016). The metagenomics and Meta-
design of the Subways and Urban Biomes (MetaSUB) international con-
sortium inaugural meeting report. Microbiome 4, 24.
36. Tomczak, K., Czerwinska, P., and Wiznerowicz, M. (2015). The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA): an immeasurable source of knowledge. Contemp.
Oncol. 19, A68–A77.
37. Ainsztein, A.M., Brooks, P.J., Dugan, V.G., Ganguly, A., Guo, M., How-
croft, T.K., Kelley, C.A., Kuo, L.S., Labosky, P.A., Lenzi, R., et al. (2015).
The NIH extracellular RNA communication consortium. J. Extracell. Vesi-
cles 4, 27493.
38. Bernstein, B.E., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., Costello, J.F., Ren, B., Milo-
savljevic, A., Meissner, A., Kellis, M., Marra, M.A., Beaudet, A.L., Ecker,
J.R., et al. (2010). The NIH roadmap epigenomics mapping consortium.
Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 1045–1048.
39. Carithers, L.J., and Moore, H.M. (2015). The genotype-tissue expression
(GTEx) project. Biopreservation Biobanking, 307–308, https://doi.org/10.
1089/bio.2015.29031.hmm.
40. Landt, S.G., Marinov, G.K., Kundaje, A., Kheradpour, P., Pauli, F., Batzo-
glou, S., Bernstein, B.E., Bickel, P., Brown, J.B., Cayting, P., et al. (2012).
ChIP-seq guidelines and practices of the ENCODE and modENCODE
consortia. Genome Res. 22, 1813–1831.
41. Dekker, J., Belmont, A.S., Guttman, M., Leshyk, V.O., Lis, J.T., Lomvar-
das, S., Mirny, L.A., O’Shea, C.C., Park, P.J., Ren, B., et al. (2017). The
4D nucleome project. Nature 549, 219–226.
42. Madrigal, P., Gabel, A., Villacampa, A., Manzano, A., Deane, C.S., Bezdan,
D., Carnero-Diaz, E., Medina, F.J., Hardiman, G., Grosse, I., et al. (2020).
Revamping Space-omics in Europe. Cell Syst. 11. Published online
November 25, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.10.006.
43. Vandenbrink, J.P., and Kiss, J.Z. (2016). Space, the ﬁnal frontier: a critical
review of recent experiments performed in microgravity. Plant Sci. 243,
115–119.
44. Elburn, D. (2019). Commercial and Merkating Pricing Policy. https://www.
nasa.gov/leo-economy/commercial-use/pricing-policy.
45. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2008). May 2019 National Occupational
Employment
and
wage
Estimates.
https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/
oes_nat.htm.
46. Cancedda, R., Liu, Y., Ruggiu, A., Tavella, S., Biticchi, R., Santucci, D.,
Schwartz, S., Ciparelli, P., Falcetti, G., Tenconi, C., et al. (2012). The
Mice Drawer System (MDS) experiment and the space endurance re-
cord-breaking mice. PLoS One 7, e32243.
47. Shimbo, M., Kudo, T., Hamada, M., Jeon, H., Imamura, Y., Asano, K.,
Okada, R., Tsunakawa, Y., Mizuno, S., Yagami, K., et al. (2016). Ground-
based assessment of JAXA mouse habitat cage unit by mouse phenotypic
studies. Exp. Anim. 65, 175–187.
48. Beheshti, A., Shirazi-Fard, Y., Choi, S., Berrios, D., Gebre, S.G., Galazka,
J.M., and Costes, S.V. (2019). Exploring the effects of spaceﬂight on
mouse physiology using the open access NASA GeneLab platform.
J. Vis. Exp. 143, https://doi.org/10.3791/58447.
49. Moyer, E.L., Dumars, P.M., Sun, G.S., Martin, K.J., Heathcote, D.G.,
Boyle, R.D., and Skidmore, M.G. (2016). Evaluation of rodent spaceﬂight
in the NASA animal enclosure module for an extended operational period
(up to 35 days). NPJ Microgravity 2, 16002.
50. Beheshti, A., Cekanaviciute, E., Smith, D.J., and Costes, S.V. (2018).
Global transcriptomic analysis suggests carbon dioxide as an environ-
mental stressor in spaceﬂight: a systems biology GeneLab case study.
Sci. Rep. 8, 4191.
51. Law, J., Van Baalen, M., Foy, M., Mason, S.S., Mendez, C., Wear, M.L.,
Meyers, V.E., and Alexander, D. (2014). Relationship between carbon di-
oxide levels and reported headaches on the international space station.
J. Occup. Environ. Med. 56, 477–483.
52. Allen, J.G., MacNaughton, P., Satish, U., Santanam, S., Vallarino, J., and
Spengler, J.D. (2016). Associations of cognitive function scores with car-
bon dioxide, ventilation, and volatile organic compound exposures in of-
ﬁce workers: a controlled exposure study of green and conventional ofﬁce
environments. Environ. Health Perspect. 124, 805–812.
53. Johnson, C.M., Subramanian, A., Edelmann, R.E., and Kiss, J.Z. (2015).
Morphometric analyses of petioles of seedlings grown in a spaceﬂight
experiment. J. Plant Res. 1007–1016, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10265-
015-0749-0.
54. Basu, P., Kruse, C.P.S., Luesse, D.R., and Wyatt, S.E. (2017). Growth in
spaceﬂight hardware results in alterations to the transcriptome and prote-
ome. Life Sci. Space Res. 15, 88–96.
55. Herranz, R., Vandenbrink, J.P., Villacampa, A., Manzano, A., Poehlman,
W.L., Feltus, F.A., Kiss, J.Z., and Medina, F.J. (2019). RNAseq analysis
of the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to Fractional gravity under blue-
light Stimulation during spaceﬂight. Front. Plant Sci. 10, https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpls.2019.01529.
56. Vandenbrink, J.P., Herranz, R., Poehlman, W.L., Alex Feltus, F., Villa-
campa, A., Ciska, M., Javier Medina, F., and Kiss, J.Z. (2019). RNA-seq
analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after exposure to blue-light
phototropic stimuli in microgravity. Am. J. Bot. 106, 1466–1476.
57. Manzano, A., Creus, E., Toma´ s, A., Valbuena, M.A., Villacampa, A., Ciska,
M., Edelmann, R.E., Kiss, J.Z., Medina, F.J., and Herranz, R. (2020). The
ll
OPEN ACCESS
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
9
Perspective

FixBox: hardware to provide on-orbit ﬁxation capabilities to the EMCS on
the ISS. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 32, 1105–1120.
58. Manzano A., Villacampa A., Sa´ ez-Va´ squez J., Kiss J.Z., Javier Medina F.,
Herranz R.. The importance of Earth reference controls in spaceﬂight
–omics research: characterization of nucleolin mutants from the Seedling
Growth experiments. iScience. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3661944
59. Herranz, R., Anken, R., Boonstra, J., Braun, M., Christianen, P.C., de
Geest, M., Hauslage, J., Hilbig, R., Hill, R.J., Lebert, M., et al. (2013).
Ground-based facilities for simulation of microgravity: organism-speciﬁc
recommendations for their use, and recommended terminology. Astrobi-
ology 13, 1–17.
60. Polo S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler A.M., Boyko V., Dinh M.T., Chen Y.-C., Fogle
H., Reinsch S.S., Ray S., Chakravarty K., Marcu O., et al RNAseq analysis
of rodent spaceﬂight experiments is confounded by sample collection
techniques.bioRxiv doi:10.1101/2020.07.18.209775
61. Kruse, C.P.S., Basu, P., Luesse, D.R., and Wyatt, S.E. (2017). Transcrip-
tome and proteome responses in RNAlater preserved tissue of Arabidop-
sis thaliana. PLoS One 12, e0175943.
62. Choi, W.-G., Barker, R.J., Kim, S.-H., Swanson, S.J., and Gilroy, S. (2019).
Variation in the transcriptome of different ecotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana
reveals signatures of oxidative stress in plant responses to spaceﬂight.
Am. J. Bot. 106, 123–136.
63. Ray, S., Gebre, S., Fogle, H., Berrios, D.C., Tran, P.B., Galazka, J.M., and
Costes, S.V. (2019). GeneLab: omics database for spaceﬂight experi-
ments. Bioinformatics 35, 1753–1759.
64. Berrios, D.C., Beheshti, A., and Costes, S.V. (2018). FAIRness and usabil-
ity for open-access omics data systems. AMIA Annu. Symp. Proc. 2018,
232–241.
65. Wilkinson, M.D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I.J., Appleton, G., Axton, M.,
Baak, A., Blomberg, N., Boiten, J.W., da Silva Santos, L.B., Bourne, P.E.,
et al. (2016). The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientiﬁc data management
and stewardship. Sci. Data 3, 160018.
66. Berrios, D., Weitz, E., Grigorev, K., Costes, S., Gebre, S., and Beheshti, A.
(2020). Visualizing Omics Data from Spaceﬂight Samples Using the NASA
GeneLab Platform. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 70, Q. Ding, O. Eulenstein, and
H. Al-Mubaid, eds., pp. 89–98, https://doi.org/10.29007/rh7n.
67. Barker, R., Lombardino, J., Rasmussen, K., and Gilroy, S. (2020). Test of
space transcriptome: a discovery environment to explore multiple plant
biology spaceﬂight experiments. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 147.
68. Beheshti, A., Miller, J., Kidane, Y., Berrios, D., Gebre, S.G., and Costes,
S.V. (2018). NASA GeneLab project: bridging space radiation omics with
ground studies. Radiat. Res. 189, 553–559.
69. Haendel, M.A., Chute, C.G., and Robinson, P.N. (2018). Classiﬁcation,
ontology, and precision medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 379, 1452–1462.
70. Yachie, N., Robotic Biology Consortium, and Natsume, T. (2017). Robotic
crowd biology with Maholo LabDroids. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 310–312.
71. Shaghaghi, A., and Antonakopoulos, K. (2012). The societal impacts of a
mars mission in the future of space exploration. Phys. Proced. 176–185,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phpro.2012.08.021.
72. Han, X., Wang, R., Zhou, Y., Fei, L., Sun, H., Lai, S., Saadatpour, A., Zhou,
Z., Chen, H., Ye, F., et al. (2018). Mapping the mouse cell atlas by micro-
well-seq. Cell 173, 1307.
73. Regev, A., Teichmann, S.A., Lander, E.S., Amit, I., Benoist, C., Birney, E.,
et al. (2017). How to build a human cell atlas. Nature 547, 24, https://doi.
org/10.7554/eLife.27041.
74. Schmidt, M.A., Schmidt, C.M., Hubbard, R.M., and Mason, C.E. (2020).
Why personalized medicine is the frontier of medicine and performance
for humans in space. New Space, 63–76, https://doi.org/10.1089/space.
2019.0037.
75. Schmidt, M.A., and Goodwin, T.J. (2013). Personalized medicine in human
space ﬂight: using Omics based analyses to develop individualized coun-
termeasures that enhance astronaut safety and performance. Metabolo-
mics 9, 1134–1156.
76. Stingl, J.C., Welker, S., Hartmann, G., Damann, V., and Gerzer, R. (2015).
Where failure is not an option –personalized medicine in astronauts. PLOS
ONE, e0140764, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0140764.
77. Zwart, S., Gibson, C., Mader, T., Ericson, K., Ploutz-Snyder, R., and Smith,
S. (2012). Vision changes after spaceﬂight are related to alterations in
folate– and vitamin B-12–dependent one-carbon metabolism. SciVee.
https://doi.org/10.4016/38821.01.
78. Zwart, S.R., Gregory, J.F., Zeisel, S.H., Gibson, C.R., Mader, T.H., Kin-
chen, J.M., Ueland, P.M., Ploutz-Snyder, R., Heer, M.A., and Smith,
S.M. (2016). Genotype, B-vitamin status, and androgens affect space-
ﬂight-induced ophthalmic changes. FASEB J. 30, 141–148.
About the Organization
The International Standards for Space Omics Processing (ISSOP) is an in-
ternational consortium of scientists who recognize the growing need for sam-
ple-processing standardization and metadata normalization of space omics
studies at the global level. It was created early in 2020 with a balanced inter-
national scope with perspectives from multiple space communities from
Japan (including Living in Space, Omics Subgroup), Europe (including Space
Omics Topical Team), and the United States (including GeneLab Analysis
Working Group). ISSOP plans to develop standardized science for these
data to enhance the robustness of the ﬁeld and potentially launch an upcoming
era of human space omics.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
PATTER 1, December 11, 2020
Perspective
