A ROS-Assisted Calcium Wave Dependent on the
AtRBOHD NADPH Oxidase and TPC1 Cation Channel
Propagates the Systemic Response to Salt Stress1[OPEN]
Matthew J. Evans2, Won-Gyu Choi2,3, Simon Gilroy*, and Richard J. Morris*
Computational and Systems Biology and Department of Crop Genetics, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research
Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom (M.J.E., R.J.M.); and Department of Botany, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706 (W.-G.C., S.G.)
ORCID IDs: 0000-0001-9597-6839 (S.G.); 0000-0003-3080-2613 (R.J.M.).
Plants exhibit rapid, systemic signaling systems that allow them to coordinate physiological and developmental responses
throughout the plant body, even to highly localized and quickly changing environmental stresses. The propagation of these
signals is thought to include processes ranging from electrical and hydraulic networks to waves of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and cytoplasmic Ca2+ traveling throughout the plant. For the Ca2+ wave system, the involvement of the vacuolar ion
channel TWO PORE CHANNEL1 (TPC1) has been reported. However, the precise role of this channel and the mechanism of
cell-to-cell propagation of the wave have remained largely undeﬁned. Here, we use the ﬁre-diffuse-ﬁre model to analyze
the behavior of a Ca2+ wave originating from Ca2+ release involving the TPC1 channel in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana).
We conclude that a Ca2+ diffusion-dominated calcium-induced calcium-release mechanism is insufﬁcient to explain the
observed wave transmission speeds. The addition of a ROS-triggered element, however, is able to quantitatively
reproduce the observed transmission characteristics. The treatment of roots with the ROS scavenger ascorbate and the
NADPH oxidase inhibitor diphenyliodonium and analysis of Ca2+ wave propagation in the Arabidopsis respiratory burst
oxidase homolog D (AtrbohD) knockout background all led to reductions in Ca2+ wave transmission speeds consistent with this
model. Furthermore, imaging of extracellular ROS production revealed a systemic spread of ROS release that is dependent on
both AtRBOHD and TPC1. These results suggest that, in the root, plant systemic signaling is supported by a ROS-assisted
calcium-induced calcium-release mechanism intimately involving ROS production by AtRBOHD and Ca2+ release dependent on
the vacuolar channel TPC1.
Plants possess a rapid systemic signaling network
that enables whole-plant responses to localized stimuli.
Examples include wounding (Miller et al., 2009),
pathogen attack (Dempsey and Klessig, 2012), and os-
motic shock (Christmann et al., 2007). The system(s)
involved in the plant-wide propagation of these signals
has been proposed to be mediated by a diverse set of
molecular regulators, including changes in membrane
potential and ion ﬂuxes (Felle and Zimmermann, 2007;
Zimmermann et al., 2009; Mousavi et al., 2013), hy-
draulics in the vasculature (Christmann et al., 2007;
Farmer et al., 2014), and reactive oxygen species (ROS;
Miller et al., 2009). A novel addition to this suite of
systemic signals was described by Choi et al. (2014), in
which a wave-like propagation of increased cytoplas-
mic Ca2+ moved throughout the plant in response to
localized salt stress. This signal propagated through the
roots at a velocity of 396 6 28 mm s21 and induced
the expression of a range of stress-response genes in the
leaves. Unlike systemic signals described previously,
this Ca2+ wave preferentially propagates through the
root cortical and endodermal cells rather than the vas-
culature (Choi et al., 2014). Furthermore, the velocity of
the signal is slower than the reported speed of 800 to
1,400 mm s21 seen with the other proposed systemic
signals, such as the ROS wave or electrical coupling
(Miller et al., 2009; Mousavi et al., 2013).
Choi et al. (2014) revealed that the Ca2+ wave could
be blocked by the application of pharmacological
1 This work was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council (BBSRC; Institute Strategic Programme
grant BB/J004553/1) to R.J.M., by the BBSRC’s Norwich Research
Park Doctoral Training Programme to M.J.E., and by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NNX13AM50G and
NNX14AT25G) and the National Science Foundation (MCB-
1329723) to S.G. and W.-G.C.
2 These authors contributed equally to the article.
3 Present address: Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Bi-
ology, University of Nevada, Howard Medical Sciences, 1664 North
Virginia Street, Reno, NV 89557.
* Address correspondence to sgilroy@wisc.edu and richard.
morris@jic.ac.uk.
The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the
ﬁndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy de-
scribed in the Instructions for Authors (www.plantphysiol.org) is:
Simon Gilroy (sgilroy@wisc.edu).
R.J.M. and S.G. supervised the experiments; M.J.E. performed the
modeling and W.-G.C. performed the imaging experiments; W.-G.C.,
M.J.E., S.G., and R.J.M., designed the experiments, analyzed the data,
and wrote the article.
[OPEN] Articles can be viewed without a subscription.
www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.16.00215
Plant Physiology, July 2016, Vol. 171, pp. 1771–1784, www.plantphysiol.org  2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.
1771

agents (La3+ and Ruthenium Red) known to inhibit
calcium-release pathways and that disruption of the
TWO PORE CHANNEL1 (TPC1) gene results in a sub-
stantial drop in wave speed (Table I). Furthermore,
overexpression of TPC1 increased the speed of the wave
by a factor of 1.7 (Table I). TPC1 also appears to be in-
volved in systemic wound-related Ca2+ increases (Kiep
et al., 2015), yet for many stress responses, whole-plant
Ca2+ signaling dynamics appear unchanged in TPC1
mutants (Ranf et al., 2008).
TPC1 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) encodes
the slow vacuolar (SV) channel (Hedrich and Neher,
1987; Peiter et al., 2005) that has been shown to be
permeable to cations such as K+ but also to Ca2+ (Ward
and Schroeder, 1994; Gradogna et al., 2009). The SV
channel has been proposed to mediate Ca2+ release
from the vacuole (Ward and Schroeder, 1994; Allen and
Sanders, 1996; Pottosin et al., 2009), although this idea
has become controversial in recent years (Hedrich and
Marten, 2011). The original electrophysiological char-
acterization of the SV channel showed that it could be
modulated by Ca2+ levels (Hedrich and Neher, 1987),
and now structural and genetic analyses of the channel
indicate the presence of Ca2+-binding EF hand domains
on the cytosolic face of the channel that aid channel
activation (Guo et al., 2016; Kintzer and Stroud, 2016;
for review, see Hedrich and Marten, 2011), coupled
with a novel Ca2+-sensitive regulatory domain on its
vacuolar lumenal face that shifts the channel’s voltage
activation toward more positive potentials as vacuolar
Ca2+ levels rise (Beyhl et al., 2009; Dadacz-Narloch
et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2016). The recently published
structure of TPC1 (Guo et al., 2016; Kintzer and Stroud,
2016) indicates several possible sites of phosphoryla-
tion offering further scope for regulation. Indeed, SV
channel activity is known to be regulated by a host of
cytosolic factors (for review, see Hedrich and Marten,
2011). However, in general, the precise role of TPC1 in
potentially mediating stress-induced Ca2+ changes, and
also which regulatory mechanisms may act to modulate
TPC1 channel gating in such responses, remain unclear.
For example, while some of the genetic components of
the wave-like propagation of stress information by Ca2+
(such as TPC1; Choi et al., 2014; Kiep et al., 2015) have
been identiﬁed, the molecular mechanisms mediating
the spread of this wave have yet to be fully elucidated.
Therefore, we used mathematical models to provide
insight into the possible modes to generate this wave
and to produce testable predictions for empirical vali-
dation of these models. We conclude that a simple
calcium-induced calcium-release (CICR) mechanism is
unlikely. To support the speeds of wave transmission
seen in vivo, we suggest that a ROS-assisted CICR
mechanism involving TPC1 and ROS production by
the NADPH oxidase Arabidopsis RESPIRATORY
BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG D (AtRBOHD) may be
required.
RESULTS
Models Based on CICR Do Not Recapitulate the
Experimentally Determined Speed of Ca2+ Wave
Propagation under Physiological Conditions
The experimental investigation of Choi et al. (2014)
highlighted a number of different Ca2+ wave speeds in
roots in response to chemical perturbations and in
mutant lines of Arabidopsis in response to local NaCl
stress application (Table I). For instance, increasing the
abundance of TPC1 using a 35S promoter resulted in
a signiﬁcantly increased wave speed. Our approach to
begin to dissect this system, therefore, has been
to evaluate whether there are parameters for a math-
ematical model of Ca2+ wave propagation that can
reproduce the empirically determined wild-type ve-
locity and whether those same parameters, but with an
increased number of TPC1 channels, also can capture
the speed in the TPC1 overexpression line. Failure to
do so would indicate that further elements and/or
other mechanisms need to be considered in the
model. This approach of testing whether a model is
consistent with the available data has the advantage of
not requiring experimental values for all parameters
(which might be extremely difﬁcult, if not impossible,
to determine).
Given the direct effect that TPC1 has on the propa-
gation of the Ca2+ wave, we ﬁrst considered whether a
CICR mechanism mediated by TPC1 could be involved.
As discussed in the introduction, TPC1’s ability to di-
rectly mediate the release of vacuolar Ca2+ is not clear
(Hedrich and Marten, 2011), and its role could well be
indirect. However, one key strength of the modeling
strategy is that it does not make any statement about
the identity of the channels responsible for mediating
the release of Ca2+, just that it is dependent on TPC1
action.
CICR can be described mathematically through the
ﬁre-diffuse-ﬁre model (Keizer et al., 1998; Ponce-
Dawson et al., 1999; Timofeeva and Coombes, 2003;
Coombes et al., 2004). This framework describes the
process in which a quantity of Ca2+, si, released through
a channel at position xi and at time ti diffuses through the
cytosol and activates the next channel at position xi+1.
Table I. Calcium wave velocities in the various lines of Arabidopsis
Rates were calculated from measurements of the time taken for the
Ca2+ signal to rise 2 SD above prestimulation levels measured at 1,000,
3,000, and 5,000 mm from the root tip after the application of 100 mM
NaCl locally to the root tip. Results are means 6 SE; n $ 5.
Genotype
Wave Velocity
Source
mm s21
Wild type
396 6 28
Choi et al. (2014)
+25 mM La3+
0
Choi et al. (2014)
+25 mM diphenyliodonium (DPI)
146 6 40
This study
+100 mM ascorbate
0
This study
tpc1-2
15.5 6 1.9
Choi et al. (2014)
oxTPC1
679 6 73
Choi et al. (2014)
AtrbohD
73 6 19
This study
1772
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.

This mechanism has the capacity to create a wave of Ca2+
that is regenerated each time a channel opens.
Approximating wave propagation through roots as a
one-dimensional system, the concentration of Ca2+, u(x,t),
can be determined using the diffusion equation:
∂u
∂t ¼ D ∂2u
∂x2 þ ∑
þ∞
i¼ 2 ∞
si
tR
dðx 2 xiÞHðt 2 tiÞ
Hðti þ tR 2 tÞ;
ð1Þ
where D is the diffusion constant of Ca2+, s is the
release strength, and tR is the time for which the chan-
nel remains open. Channels are modeled as point
sources that are characterized by Dirac delta func-
tions, d(x), in space and by the product of two Heavi-
side step functions, H(t), in time, to capture the open
time. A channel at a position, xi, on the vacuole is
assumed to open when the cytosolic Ca2+ concentra-
tion at that position is greater than the threshold
value uc. This gating value represents the mathemat-
ical description of either the concentration-dependent
binding kinetics of a ligand-gated channel or the req-
uisite buildup of ionic charge needed to open a
voltage-gated channel.
We assume that the release of Ca2+ from the vacuole
occurs quickly compared with the time for diffusion
between channels, so that we can treat a release as a
point source in time (tR = 0). For a system of equally
spaced channels with separation d, the velocity of the
resulting wave is given by Pearson and Ponce-Dawson
(1998):
v;4D
d log s
duc
ð2Þ
Within a cell, the vacuole (with the ubiquitously
expressed channel TPC1) typically occupies 50% to
90% of the interior volume (Macklon et al., 1996),
whereas plasmodesmata, presumably lacking TPC1,
connect cells, leading to two distinct regions for the
propagation of the wave in the model (Fig. 1A). In the
ﬁrst, the Ca2+ wave is propagated through the cyto-
plasm surrounding the vacuole. In the case of approx-
imately equally distributed TPC1 channels on the
tonoplast, the Ca2+ wave has a velocity given by Equa-
tion 2. In the second region, the wave must move be-
tween neighboring cells. If the mechanism behind
transmission in the cytoplasm is a self-propagating
wave of CICR mediated by TPC1, then presumably
this mechanism will reduce to passive diffusion over
a distance dv (the cell wall region) between the cyto-
plasm in adjacent cells through plasmodesmata. We as-
sumed that this plasmodesmal coupling poses no
obstacle to diffusion, so that the model has the best
chance of propagating a wave at maximal speed. In
this case, Ca2+ moving from a cell takes a time, T, to
activate the ﬁrst TPC1 channel on the tonoplast of the
neighboring cell. The concentration proﬁle for a single
release evaluated at the time of activation of the next
channel (when u = uc) then satisﬁes the expression
uc ¼
s
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4pDT
p
exp

2 dv2
4DT

ð3Þ
We assume here that the activation of the ﬁrst channel
in the neighboring cell is dominated by Ca2+ released
from the closest channel in the previous cell. Within this
model, the velocity of a Ca2+ wave is determined by the
velocities across these two regions. The spatial and tem-
poral resolution of the experiments measuring these
speeds (Choi et al., 2014) is insufﬁcient to robustly dis-
tinguish transmission through each cell versus the cell-
to-cell component crossing dv, even using the high
spatial and temporal resolution afforded by confocal
microscopy. Therefore, the transit speed between the
two regions cannot be separated and so is averaged in
the empirical measurements. For a cell of length L, this
average speed is given by
vpredicted ¼
vL
L 2 dv þ vT:
ð4Þ
The time taken to cross the cell wall region (Eq. 3)
and the velocity in the cytoplasm surrounding each
vacuole region (Eq. 2) both depend on the parameter
ratio s/uc. This dependency implies that, in order to
decrease the time spent crossing the cell wall region,
the cell must change the release properties of the chan-
nels, but this has a corresponding effect on how
quickly the wave crosses the cytoplasm in the vacuolar
region. We used the measured velocity in the wild
type, 395 mm s21, the measured density of TPC1 chan-
nels in mesophyll cells, d = 1 mm (Pottosin and Schön-
knecht, 2007), and a commonly used value for
the diffusion rate of Ca2+ in the cytosol, D = 20 mm2 s21
(Allbritton et al., 1992), to calculate an estimate for this
unknown parameter ratio, s/uc. We then used this value
to determine if the model can recapitulate the velocity in
the TPC1 overexpressor (oxTPC1), 679 6 73 mm s21 (Choi
et al., 2014).
The overexpressor has an increased density of TPC1
channels, which results in a decreased channel separa-
tion and so altered wave kinetics in the model. Peiter
et al. (2005) measured the average numbers of TPC1
channels in vacuolar membrane patches in both the
wild type and the overexpressor line. With the average
channel density measured by Pottosin and Schön-
knecht (2007), we used the channel number data to
estimate the channel separation. For the TPC1 over-
expressor, we obtained a channel separation, d, of about
0.6 mm. Using this channel separation estimate and the
ratio s/uc calculated from the wild-type data, we cal-
culated the expected velocity in the TPC1 over-
expressor for a range of cell lengths and intervacuolar
distances, dv, covering those found in the regions of the
Arabidopsis root where empirical wave speed deter-
minations have been performed (Fig. 1B).
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
1773
Modeling ROS and Calcium Waves

We see that the model can only recapitulate the ve-
locity in the overexpressor when dv is sufﬁciently small.
This result did not depend on our choice of diffusion
constant (Supplemental Fig. S1A) but could be affected
by changes in the channel separation, d (Supplemental
Fig. S1B). Since our chosen value for d came from TPC1
channel density data from mesophyll cells and the wave
travels through the root, different expression levels of
TPC1 could result in different densities of TPC1 on the
vacuolar membrane. We tested for such potential dif-
ferences with quantitative PCR (QPCR) analysis of roots
and shoots dissected from plants grown as for the Ca2+
imaging. This analysis showed no statistically signiﬁcant
difference between root and shoot expression in the wild
type (Supplemental Fig. S2). In the overexpressor, shoots
showed a 1.9-fold higher transcript level than the roots of
the same plants, so any change in actual channel density
between roots and shoots will likely be small.
Measurements of cell wall thickness in leaves
(Moghaddam and Wilman, 1998) and imaging of tono-
plast intrinsic proteins in root cells (Werner et al., 2003;
Hunter et al., 2007; Gattolin et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2014)
suggest typical values of dv in the range of 1 to 2 mm,
with values of 10 mm and even 60 mm in some cases.
Due to the variability in such parameters drawn from
the literature, we used the GFP signals in the images
from the Ca2+ measurement data to visualize the cyto-
plasm of the cells used for Ca2+ wave speed measure-
ment and so deﬁne where the vacuoles within each cell
likely ended. We then measured the distance between
the vacuole (where the yellow ﬂuorescent protein [YFP]
signal was less than 2 SD above background) in one
cell to the vacuole in the adjacent cell using ImageJ
(Schneider et al., 2012). As the Ca2+ wave speed is
constant throughout the root at approximately 400 mm
s21 in the wild type (Choi et al., 2014), we concentrated
on making these measurements in images taken at the
1,000-mm region from the root tip to allow direct com-
parison with the data in Figures 3 and 4, which focus on
Ca2+ wave responses at this point in the root. Using this
approach, average cytoplasmic lengths between vacu-
oles in adjacent cells were 4.4 6 1.2 mm (epidermis;
mean 6 SD, n = 29), 5.4 6 1.5 mm (cortex; n = 38), and
4.9 6 1.4 (endodermis; n = 41). It is important to note
that vacuoles are dynamic organelles, so these mea-
surements should be viewed as time-averaged values of
vacuolar behavior, as they are taken from random im-
ages across multiple independent experiments.
To assess the sensitivity of the model to dv and how
well the measured intervacuolar distances could support
a model that recapitulates measured wave speeds, we
extended our modeling analysis to consider an array of
cells with different values for dv, distributed either as two
blocks of cells (Fig. 1Ci) or randomly among the array
(Fig. 1Cii). This approach requires that we simulate the
ﬁre-diffuse-ﬁre process as described in “Materials and
Methods” rather than estimate the velocity using Equa-
tion 4. As before, we use the measured velocity in the
wild type to determine the unconstrained parameter
ratio, s/uc, and then increased the TPC1 channel density
to evaluate whether the model can recapitulate the
measured velocity in the overexpressor. We asked what
Figure 1. Ca2+ wave propagation via CICR and Ca2+ diffusion through the plasmodesmata can explain observed velocities under
strict circumstances. A, Scheme of the model. Calcium is released through activated TPC1, and it diffuses through the cytoplasm a
distance dtpc1 to activate neighboring TPC1 channels. At the end of a cell (length L), the signal diffuses passively to activate the
neighboring cell (distance dv) through the plasmodesmata. B, Predicted wave speeds for the TPC1 overexpressor (OxTPC1) for a
range of L and dv using Equations 2 to 4, where the model parameters are chosen to ﬁt the wild-type velocity (Table I). The shaded
region indicates 1 SD in the observed velocity. C, To account for distributions in dv, two simple schemes were tested. A one-
dimensional array of cells with either dv = 10 mm (white) or dv =dvmin (blue) was set up in sequential order (i) or in random order (ii).
D, The result of varying the proportion of cells within Ci with dvmin, as described in B, and utilizing a full simulation (see “Materials
and Methods”).
1774
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.

proportion of the array must have a small dv value if
the largest value of dv is 10 mm. Figure 1D shows how,
even with an intervacuole separation of 1 mm, the
smallest value suggested in the literature (Moghaddam
and Wilman, 1998; Werner et al., 2003; Hunter et al., 2007;
Gattolin et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2014) and much less than
our average measurements of dv in the root cortex and
endodermis, more than 75% of the cells must have this
value to reproduce the empirically determined wave
speed. Figure 1D has the cells organized according to the
scheme in Figure 1Ci, but the choice of cell distribution
has no effect on the predicted velocities.
Thus, with such intervacuolar distances, Ca2+ diffu-
sion would not be sufﬁciently rapid to recapitulate ex-
perimentally determined wave speeds. We emphasize
that this model has not included any kind of obstruction
to diffusion that the plasmodesmata may produce,
which would make the wave even slower. In summary,
the range of distances in the literature together with
our analysis suggest that it is unlikely that calcium re-
lease through a TPC1-dependent CICR-driven mechanism
alone is responsible for propagating the observed signal.
TPC1 Channel Clustering Does Not Explain Observed Ca2+
Wave Propagation Speeds
The analysis outlined above assumes that TPC1 is
distributed uniformly across the vacuolar membrane.
Clustering of signaling components may provide a
mechanism for selective ampliﬁcation and channeling of
signals that could, in theory, contribute to increased sig-
nal propagation rates. Indeed, the observed distribution
of channels (Peiter et al., 2005) suggests that TPC1 may
show a degree of clustering. The distribution of random
independent events on a ﬁxed interval of space or time
(such as the area of a membrane patch) follows a Poisson
distribution (Riley et al., 1998), so if TPC1 channels were
distributed randomly across the tonoplast, we would
expect the patch clamp data of Peiter et al. (2005), which
monitor individual TPC1 channel gating in isolated ton-
oplast membrane patches, to obey a Poisson distribution.
In Figure 2, we compare the measured distribution
(Peiter et al., 2005) of TPC1 channels with the best-ﬁt
Poisson distribution for both the wild-type and over-
expressor lines. We see that the Poisson distribution does
not describe either of the experimental distributions well.
A x2 test with the Poisson distribution as a null hy-
pothesis indicates that both the wild type and the over-
expressor show strong evidence of clustering (Table II).
To investigate the impact of channel clustering on the
wave propagation speeds, we performed the following
simulations. An initial wave was generated assuming
equally spaced channels. Keeping the total number of
channels the same, the number of channels in a cluster
was increased (initially one channel per cluster with
separation d, changing to two channels per cluster with
separation 2d, and so on).
We simulated the system with an array of 51 cells (as
in Fig. 1C) with all dv values the same and a cell length,
L, of 100 mm. This analysis showed that the speed of the
wave falls with increased clustering (Fig. 2). The opti-
mal arrangement for most rapid signal propagation,
therefore, is when channels are equally spaced.
The expression for the wave velocity (Eq. 2) explains
this decrease in velocity with increased clustering.
Treating each cluster of channels as a single release site,
with a release strength proportional to the number of
channels in that cluster (Shuai and Jung, 2003), the ef-
fect of increasing the degree of clustering by a factor of
2, say, involves changing the channel separation d →
d9 = 2d and the release strength s →s9 = 2s (since we
Figure 2. Clustering of TPC1 on the tonoplast re-
duces the efﬁciency of CICR-mediated Ca2+ wave
transmission. A and B, Numbers of TPC1 channels
observed in vacuolar membrane patches by Peiter
et al. (2005; bars) compared with best-ﬁt Poisson
distributions (lines) for the wild type (A) and the
TPC1 overexpressor (B). C, How the velocity of a
Ca2+ wave varies with increased clustering within
the CICR model. The number of channels is kept
constant as the number per cluster increases. Re-
lease strength, s/uc, was chosen so the velocity
with equally spaced channels matched the wild-
type velocity (395 mm s21). The dashed line shows
the behavior predicted by Equation 5.
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
1775
Modeling ROS and Calcium Waves

now have twice as many channels at a release site). The
resulting velocity v9 is
v’ ¼ 4D
d’ log s’
d’uc
¼ 4D
2d log s
duc
¼ 1
2 v
ð5Þ
This prediction captures the qualitative behavior of the
wave, as shown in Figure 2C. This prediction describes
the simulation for dv = 1 mm better than for dv = 10 mm,
because it neglects the intervacuolar separation, which
has a much larger inﬂuence when dv = 10 mm.
In the Ca2+ diffusion model, an optimal distribution
of equally spaced channels is unlikely to explain the
speed of the observed Ca2+ waves. An increase in
clustering between the wild type and the TPC1 over-
expressor would lead to less efﬁcient signal propaga-
tion than the equally spaced channels and, therefore, an
even worse ﬁt.
ROS Production via RBOHD Is Sufﬁcient to Activate
Calcium Release and Wave Propagation at Observed Rates
To explain the observed Ca2+ wave speeds, we hy-
pothesized that ROS may have a role to play. Rapid
propagation of a systemic increase in ROS produced by
the NADPH oxidase AtRBOHD has been reported in
response to stress signals (Torres et al., 2002; Miller
et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2009). RBOHD is expressed
ubiquitously throughout Arabidopsis plants and is lo-
calized to the plasma membrane of cells (Sagi and
Fluhr, 2006). It is responsible for the production of ROS
such as hydrogen peroxide in the apoplast and is in-
volved in a range of signaling processes, such as in
defense (Torres et al., 2002) and in the opening and
closing of stomata (Zhang et al., 2009). Furthermore, it
has been shown to be essential to the propagation of the
ROS waves by Miller et al. (2009). The RBOH family of
proteins contain two EF hand calcium-binding domains
as well as multiple potential phosphorylation sites,
which enable their activation in response to raised cy-
tosolic Ca2+ (Sagi and Fluhr, 2006). Indeed, the dy-
namics of changes in ROS and Ca2+ also are known to
interact in the processes of ROS-induced Ca2+ release
and Ca2+-induced ROS release (Gilroy et al., 2014).
A conceptual model for ROS wave propagation was
produced by Dubiella et al. (2013), where Ca2+ acting
via
the
calcium-dependent
protein
kinase
family
member 5 stimulates ROS production from the plasma
membrane NADPH oxidase RBOHD and ROS is able to
trigger Ca2+ inﬂux across the plasma membrane into
cells via ROS-regulated plasma membrane Ca2+ chan-
nels (Richards et al., 2014). This provides a self-
propagation
mechanism
in
which
ROS
triggers
plasma membrane Ca2+ inﬂux into the cell, potentially
triggering CICR via TCP1 at the tonoplast. The cellu-
lar Ca2+ rise in turn activates RBOHD, which then
produces more apoplastic ROS. ROS could potentially
travel through the apoplast and trigger the same pro-
cess in the neighboring cell.
This ROS-dependent model can be described mathe-
matically to quantitatively analyze whether it is consistent
with the observed stress-related Ca2+ waves. ROS-induced
ROS release can be described by Equation 1, where u is
now the concentration of ROS in the apoplast. ROS
does not activate a neighboring RBOHD directly but
via triggering increased Ca2+ in the cytoplasm, which in
turn activates RBOHD. The critical threshold parameter uc
incorporates the indirect nature and complexity of this
activation process in one variable and so provides a
mathematical means through which changes in Ca2+
behavior can feed back on ROS propagation with-
out needing to parameterize the detailed molecular
mechanisms behind this process. If higher levels of
Ca2+ release are being maintained in a cell (e.g. because
of TPC1 overexpression), then we would expect the
RBOHDs to be activated more quickly, which can be
represented in the model by a decreased uc, irrespective
of the precise molecular mechanism responsible for the
Ca2+-dependent activation.
ROS diffusion in the apoplast may be predicted to be
faster than that of Ca2+ in the cytoplasm, as highly active
cytoplasmic Ca2+ buffering and sequestration mechanisms
limit the cytoplasmic movement of this ion (Allbritton
et al., 1992); although it is important to note that the levels
of ROS in the cell wall also are thought to be tightly reg-
ulated by a balance between their generation systems and
ROS-scavenging mechanisms (Kärkönen and Kuchitsu,
2015). RBOHDs also exist at a higher density than TPC1
(Peiter et al., 2005; Hao et al., 2014). This puts the propa-
gation of the ROS wave into the continuous regime
(Pearson and Ponce-Dawson, 1998); therefore, the velocity
of the ROS-assisted wave has a different functional form
than from a purely CICR-driven process, in which it
propagates as a saltatory wave (Coombes et al., 2004):
v;
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
sD
ductR
s
ð6Þ
The wild-type velocity can be used to calculate the ratio
of the unknown parameters. To test the model, we
evaluated the velocity in the TPC1 overexpressor:
vþ;
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
sD
aductR
s
¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃa
p vWT
ð7Þ
where a is the decrease in the ﬁring threshold uc due to
the increase in TPC1 channels in the overexpressor. The
Table II. Clustering of TPC1 channels
A x2 test of channel count data (Peiter et al., 2005) was performed
under the null hypothesis that TPC1 channels are (uniform) randomly
distributed
Line
Best-Fit Poisson Mean
x2
Wild type
5.14288
7.2 3 108
oxTPC1
23.6695
1.54 3 106
1776
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.

number of channels increases by a factor of 24.2/8.6
(Peiter et al., 2005). Therefore, the rate of calcium-
dependent activation of RBOHD should increase and
uc should decrease. Using a ﬁrst-order approximation
for this response as a function of the number of channels
results in a = 8.6/24.2, for which the model predicts v+ =
662.6 mm s21. This estimate is well within the experi-
mental uncertainty of the experimentally measured
value of calcium wave speed from the overexpressor
(Table I). Hence, this ROS-assisted CICR model is able
to produce a good ﬁt to the data.
Importantly for this ROS-assisted CICR model, we
used the average value of channel density derived from
Peiter et al. (2005). This parameter is independent of the
underlying distribution of TPC1, being derived from
the total number of channels observed divided by the
number of samples. For the ROS-assisted model, only
the number of TPC1 channels is used in the analysis, but
as we demonstrated with the pure CICR model, clus-
tering of TPC1 will tend to slow down wave propaga-
tion but is unlikely to affect the inferences drawn from
the predictions.
Blocking ROS Production with DPI, Ascorbate, and in the
AtrbohD Knockout Validates Predictions of the ROS-
Assisted CICR Model
To empirically test the prediction of a ROS-assisted
mechanism for Ca2+ wave propagation, we attempted
to dissect the involvement of ROS in the Ca2+ wave by
treating the root with the ROS scavenger ascorbate and
the NADPH oxidase inhibitor DPI. To separate the ef-
fects of these compounds on the ability of the plant to
propagate the wave versus the ability to initially trig-
ger a stress response, we initiated a Ca2+ wave by lo-
cally treating the tip of the root with 100 mM NaCl in the
absence of any inhibitor. The root system of Arabi-
dopsis was growing through a Phytagel matrix, so the
local treatment was applied by cutting an approxi-
mately 500-mm 3 500-mm hole in the gel ahead of the
root tip and letting the root apex grow into this win-
dow, which was subsequently ﬁlled with growth me-
dium containing 100 mM NaCl. We had determined
previously that this treatment localizes the salt stress to
the very apex of the root and reproducibly triggers a
Ca2+ wave propagating shootward from the root apex
(Choi et al., 2014). Either 25 to 100 mM potassium as-
corbate, 25 to 200 mM DPI, or growth medium (negative
control) was applied locally 10 min prior to the root tip
NaCl stimulation to a similar window cut into the gel
surrounding the mature region of the root more than
1,000 mm shootward of the root tip. In all cases, the Ca2+
wave propagated at approximately 400 mm s21 from the
root tip to the region treated with inhibitor, but transit
through the treatment region was altered depending on
the pharmacological agent present. Calcium wave
movement through the region treated with growth
medium alone was maintained at 400 mm s21. Treat-
ment with 25 mM ascorbate slowed wave propagation to
64 mm s21, and detectable Ca2+ changes were abolished
with 100 mM ascorbate pretreatment. Treatment with up
to 200 mM DPI signiﬁcantly attenuated the magnitude of
the Ca2+ increase and slowed propagation rates to
146 mm s21 (Table I; Fig. 3A). These observations are
consistent with a requirement for ROS and NADPH
oxidase-mediated
ROS
production
in
Ca2+
wave
transmission. Furthermore, knockout of AtRBOHD
slowed propagation of the Ca2+ wave to 73 mm s21 (Table I;
Fig. 4; Supplemental Figs. S3 and S4).
One further prediction of the ROS-assisted CICR
model is that loss of RBOH-driven ROS production in
the oxTPC1 background will slow wave propagation:
vrbohD=oxTPC1 ¼ 1ﬃﬃﬃa
p vrbohD
ð8Þ
with a as before. This suggests a velocity of 123 mm s21.
To test this prediction, we applied DPI to the oxTPC1
plants and monitored wave speeds. In the oxTPC1
background, a Ca2+ wave was still evident after pre-
treatment with DPI, but the rate of transmission was
slowed to 134.4 mm s21 (Supplemental Fig. S4).
Imaging of the Extracellular ROS Wave Using OxyBurst
Green-Bovine Serum Albumin
Implicit in the ROS-assisted CICR model of Ca2+
wave propagation is that the Ca2+ wave should be ac-
companied by a similarly propagating wave of apo-
plastic ROS production. Although the presence of a
ROS wave has been inferred from the wave-like acti-
vation of the ROS-dependent transcriptional response
(Miller et al., 2009), direct measurement of the wave-
like propagation of an apoplastic ROS signal has
proven technically challenging. We used the ROS-
sensing ﬂuorescent dye OxyBurst Green H2HFF con-
jugated to bovine serum albumin (BSA) to exclude this
ROS sensor from the cytoplasm of the root. OxyBurst
becomes more ﬂuorescent upon oxidation and so pro-
vides a measure of the kinetics of ROS increases
(Monshausen et al., 2007, 2009). Therefore, we moni-
tored OxyBurst ﬂuorescence intensity before and after
local NaCl stimulation of the root tip at points distant
from the site of NaCl stimulation to try to capture
the spread of a putative wave of ROS production. As
OxyBurst shows an irreversible increase in ﬂuorescence
upon oxidation, the constitutive background ROS
production by the root led to a slow increase in signal
with time prior to treatment (Fig. 5, A and B;
Supplemental Movie S1). Addition of growth medium
to the root tip (control) led to a slight increase in Oxy-
Burst signal measured 3,000 mm away from the root tip
site of local medium addition (Fig. 5, A and B;
Supplemental Movie S1), which may represent a small
response to the mechanical signal generated by me-
dium addition (Monshausen et al., 2007). However,
when NaCl was added to the tip, this distal region
showed a rapid and signiﬁcantly larger increase in
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
1777
Modeling ROS and Calcium Waves

OxyBurst ﬂuorescence (Fig. 5, A and B; Supplemental
Movie S2). Calculation of the speed of movement of the
signal triggering this response was made by monitoring
the time for a signiﬁcant increase (greater than 2 SD
above prestimulated levels) in the mean OxyBurst sig-
nal monitored at 3,000 and 5,000 mm from the root apex
in 14 replicate experiments. This analysis indicated a
propagation speed of 374 mm s21.
Consistent with the model of ROS-assisted CICR,
these ROS increases distal to the site of NaCl stimula-
tion were dependent on AtRBOHD and TPC1, being
attenuated in AtrbohD and tpc1-2 mutants (Fig. 5B). The
ROS increase did not differ signiﬁcantly (P . 0.05,
ANOVA) from the wild-type response in the TPC1
overexpression line (Fig. 5C).
DISCUSSION
We have applied the ﬁre-diffuse-ﬁre model to ex-
plore the mechanisms behind the plant-wide trans-
mission of stress-induced Ca2+ waves, focusing on the
salt-induced wave of the root. Our analyses suggest
that a simple CICR-based mechanism relying upon
a self-reinforcing Ca2+ release from the vacuole via TPC1-
dependent Ca2+ efﬂux and diffusion of Ca2+ between cells
is unlikely to account for the observed velocity of wave
movement. Extending this CICR mechanism for Ca2+
wave transit through the cell with Ca2+-dependent apo-
plastic ROS production to couple between cells, however,
is able to support the observed velocities.
ROS have been implicated repeatedly in systemic
signaling (Alvarez et al., 1998; Karpinski et al., 1999;
Miller et al., 2009; Suzuki et al., 2013), and while it
is tempting to identify this and the Ca2+ wave we have
studied here as two sides of the same coin, there are
important differences that have yet to be explained.
First, the ROS wave in response to wounding travels at
1,400 mm s21 (Miller et al., 2009), much faster than the
Ca2+ wave we studied here. This difference might
be because the wound-induced ROS wave propa-
gates through the vascular tissue, whereas the Ca2+
wave appears to be restricted to the cortex and endo-
dermis (Choi et al., 2014). The vasculature is well suited
for long-distance transmission of signals (van Bel et al.,
2014), particularly electrical signals. Alternatively, the
Figure 3. Effects of DPI and ascorbate on salt-induced Ca2+ wave transmission. A, Quantitative analysis of the time course of Ca2+
changes in response to local 100 mM NaCl treatment at the root tip with and without 25 or 100 mM ascorbate pretreatment. B,
Representative frame images of systemic tissues (1,000 mm from the root tip) in response to local 100 mM NaCl with and without
25 or 100 mM ascorbate pretreatment. C, Quantitative analysis of the time course of Ca2+ changes in response to local 100 mM
NaCl treatment at the root tip with and without 25, 100, or 200 mM DPI pretreatment. The quantitative systemic Ca2+ wave is in
response to 100 mM local NaCl. To allow for comparisons, the no-inhibitor pretreatment control is duplicated from A. D, Rep-
resentative frame images of systemic tissues (1,000 mm from the root tip) in response to local 100 mM NaCl with 25, 100, or
200 mM DPI pretreatment. Results in A and C represent means 6 SE of n $ 5 (DPI and ascorbate) or n = 17 (the wild type) monitored
1,000 mm from the site of root tip NaCl application. Bars in B and D = 100 mm.
1778
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.

triggering stimulus also may impact on propagation
speed/mechanism. Indeed, the velocity of the wound-
related ROS wave is very similar to that of electrical
responses to wounding (Mousavi et al., 2013), sug-
gesting that ROS and electrical signals may act together
in the wounding response (van Bel et al., 2014). It is
striking, however, that the signal velocity in the rbohD
mutant is compromised in response to either salt stress
(this study) or wounding (Miller et al., 2009), hinting at
some possibly shared core components of the trans-
mission machinery. Indeed, both the NaCl-triggered
Ca2+ wave propagation (Choi et al., 2014) and the
wound-induced systemic Ca2+ increases (Kiep et al.,
2015) appear to be dependent on the TPC1, reinforcing
the idea of conserved elements of the propagation
system.
The activity of SV channels is known to be inhibited
by ROS and activated by reducing agents (Carpaneto
et al., 1999; Scholz-Starke et al., 2004; Pottosin et al.,
2009), and this may at ﬁrst sight appear contradictory to
the ROS/TPC1-related propagation mechanism modeled
above. However, since ROS is generated within the
apoplast by RBOHDs, it would initially be able to
rapidly gate ROS-activated channels in the plasma
membrane. The ROS would then need to cross the
plasma membrane and the cytoplasm before interacting
with TPC1. It can take 0.9 s to develop a stable gradient
of ROS across plasma membranes (Bienert et al., 2006),
although the maximum theoretical rate could be much
faster (Vestergaard et al., 2012). Given the speed of the
Ca2+ wave in the wild type, it should take only ap-
proximately 2.5 ms (TPC1 channel separation over the
wave speed) to activate each TPC1 in sequence; thus, it
is unlikely that the ROS would have time to trigger
a direct effect on TPC1’s ability to mediate the initial
propagation phase of the Ca2+ wave. The slower
Figure 4. The Ca2+ wave has a reduced velocity in the AtrbohD mutant. Ca2+ propagation occurred in mature root, 1,000 mm
shootward from the site of direct salt stimulation at the root tip. A, Kymographs showing altered Ca2+ wave dynamics in the wild
type versus the AtrbohD mutant. To generate the kymogram, quantitative ratiometric data (YFP-to-cyan ﬂuorescent protein [CFP]
ratio) were extracted from a region of interest (ROI) 1,000 mm from the tip site of 100 mM NaCl addition (monitor in the diagram at
top). Starting at the edge of this ROI closest to the root tip, ratiometric data from a 5-mm-tall (along the root-shoot axis of the root) 3
144-mm-wide region covering the cortex and endodermis was averaged and plotted at 0 mm of ROI. This 5-mm-tall region was
then moved 5 mm shootward within the ROI and the analysis repeated, and the average ratio value was plotted at 5 mm of ROI.
This process was repeated at sequential 5-mm distances from the start point to cover the 200-mm region of the root depicted.
Analysis was then repeated on each of the images taken for the time course of the experiment (imaging every 2 s). Data were
extracted using this approach from ﬁve roots and averaged, and pseudocolor-coded results are presented. B, Representative
images of the time course of Ca2+ increase measured at 1,000 mm from the site of 100 mM NaCl to the root tip. Ca2+ levels were
monitored using confocal ratio imaging of plants expressing Yellow Cameleon nano-65 and pseudocolor coded according to the
scale at right. Time represents seconds after NaCl addition. Results shown are representative of n $ 5. Note that Ca2+ increase is
limited primarily to cortex and endodermal cells in both the wild type and atrbohD, but the increase is delayed in the atrbohD
mutant. Bar = 100 mm.
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
1779
Modeling ROS and Calcium Waves

ROS-triggered inactivation of TPC1, therefore, may
have an important role to play in terminating the wave
once it has moved through the cell. ROS-based TPC1
inactivation also could lead to a refractory period
where the channel is unable to support further Ca2+
increases, leading to the wave-like progression of the
Ca2+ increase.
Inherent to the model presented above is rapid trig-
gering of TPC1 by ROS-dependent cytosolic Ca2+ in-
creases. Although the SV channel has long been
identiﬁed as being activated by cytosolic Ca2+ (Hedrich
and Neher, 1987), large concentrations of Ca2+ are re-
quired (Guo et al., 2016). The ability of the SV channel to
directly release Ca2+ also is a topic of some controversy
(Hedrich and Marten, 2011), as large vacuolar Ca2+ con-
centrations inhibit the activation of TPC1 (Beyhl et al.,
2009; Hedrich and Marten, 2011; Guo et al., 2016). The
SV channel is known to be regulated by many other
factors (for review, see Hedrich and Marten, 2011). For
example, recent structural data have indicated a num-
ber of potential phosphorylation sites on TPC1 (Kintzer
and Stroud, 2016), and the beet (Beta vulgaris) SV
channel is activated by calmodulin (Pottosin et al.,
2009). Such alternative regulatory mechanisms provide
a wide range of other means for the activation of this
channel as part of the Ca2+ wave transmission process.
TPC1 also could be only indirectly responsible for the
release of Ca2+ from the vacuole, possibly by controlling
changes in membrane voltage that activate other
channels (Peiter, 2011). Our modeling approach does
not make any assumptions about TPC1’s role in medi-
ating Ca2+ release, merely requiring that the activation
of TPC1 leads to Ca2+ release, whether directly or
indirectly.
The knockout of TPC1 that slows Ca2+ wave trans-
mission approximately 40-fold only delays the Ca2+
response at the site of direct NaCl treatment by 30 s
(Choi et al., 2014), suggesting that TPC1 may have a
more pronounced role in transmission than in the initial
direct stress response, consistent with the lack of an
obvious Ca2+ dynamics phenotype in response to stress
in tpc1-2 when measured at the whole-plant level (Ranf
et al., 2008).
The model presented in Figure 6 also identiﬁes two
pools of Ca2+ that are likely to be important for gener-
ating the cytosolic Ca2+ wave, apoplastic, with inﬂux
through plasma membrane channels, and vacuolar,
with inﬂux to the cytosol, through TPC1 or a TPC1-
related channel on the tonoplast. Thus, extracellular
Ca2+ levels in the wall and lumenal Ca2+ levels in the
vacuole may be other key regulators of Ca2+ wave
propagation, especially as TPC1 is known to be re-
sponsive to both cytosolic and lumenal vacuolar Ca2+
levels as described above. While a role for extracellular
Ca2+ signals is well established (e.g. in the stomatal re-
sponse; Han et al., 2003; Nomura et al., 2008; Weinl
et al., 2008), the potential for signaling-related dynamic
changes of vacuolar lumenal Ca2+ levels remains poorly
understood.
Our direct imaging of a spreading extracellular ROS
increase shown in Figure 5 provides a strong support-
ing element for the ROS-assisted CICR model of wave
propagation. The dynamics of a ROS wave have been
largely inferred from, for example, the timing and
Figure 5. Extracellular ROS increases ac-
company the Ca2+ wave to NaCl stimulation.
A, Extracellular ROS monitored with OxyBurst
Green-BSA measured 3,000 mm shootward of
a wild-type root tip treated with medium
(control) or 100 mM NaCl (see Supplemental
Movies S1 and S2). B, Quantiﬁcation of Oxy-
Burst signal at 3,000 mm from the tip in the
wild type and mutants in AtRBOHD and
TPC1. C, Responses measured at 3,000 mm
shootward in oxTPC1 treated with medium
(control) or 100 mM NaCl added to the root tip.
Signals were normalized to the mean signal for
60 s prior to additions at 0 s. OxyBurst be-
comes irreversibly more ﬂuorescent as it is
oxidized. Results are means 6 SE; n $ 5. For
clarity, the data from atrbohD, tpc1-2, and
oxTPC1 are shown across B and C. To allow
for comparison, the same wild type + NaCl
and control data are shown in both B and C.
1780
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.

spatial patterning of the activation of ROS-responsive
promoters (Miller et al., 2009). However, we have now
been able to show that an extracellular ROS increase
accompanied the Ca2+ wave moving at approximately
400 mm s21, suggesting a propagating ROS wave. This
ROS wave is dependent on AtRBOHD and TPC1,
consistent with the ROS-assisted Ca2+ wave model
where ROS trigger Ca2+ increases that then propagate
and trigger further distal ROS responses. It is important
to note here that although this wave of ROS increase
appears to be moving at approximately the same ve-
locity as the Ca2+ increase, this measurement of rate
must be interpreted with caution. The OxyBurst Green-
BSA sensor is designed to be excluded from the cell
wall. Thus, this imaging technique relies on the diffu-
sion of ROS from the surface of the root to the medium
and so likely incorporates a delay in appearance as the
ROS move through the apoplast and accumulate in the
medium. This caveat is especially relevant as the NaCl-
triggered Ca2+ wave, and by implication the ROS-
related events associated with it, are initiated at the
cortex and endodermis, so ROS would need to transit
the epidermal apoplast to begin to leave the root.
Therefore, although we can say that an extracellular
ROS increase accompanies the Ca2+ wave, deﬁning
whether the ROS appear before or concurrent with the
Ca2+ increases must await the development of im-
proved extracellular ROS imaging technology. How-
ever, the inhibition of the propagation of the Ca2+ wave
by treatment with DPI or ascorbate (Fig. 3) and in the
atrbohD mutant (Fig. 4) suggests that the Ca2+ wave is at
least dependent on ROS production. The residual wave
transmission seen with DPI could reﬂect an incomplete
inhibition of RBOH activity by this pharmacological
agent or the action of a parallel, DPI-resistant ROS-
generating mechanism as part of the wave propagation
mechanism.
Our combination of mathematical modeling and ex-
perimental analysis supports the following model for
the propagation of the systemic signal in response to
salt. Locally, the application of salt triggers the move-
ment of ions between various compartments in the cell,
and in particular, the concentration of Ca2+ in the cy-
toplasm increases. This signal leads to the activation of
RBOHD via its EF hand domains and via phosphoryl-
ation by Ca2+-binding kinases (Dubiella et al., 2013). As
illustrated in Figure 6, local production of ROS
by RBOHD is predicted to activate plasma membrane
Ca2+ channels. ROS-sensitive Ca2+ channel activities
have been monitored at the electrophysiological level in
Arabidopsis root cells (Foreman et al., 2003; Demidchik
and Maathuis, 2007; Ordoñez et al., 2014), and ROS-
responsive candidates such as the annexins (Richards
et al., 2014) have been identiﬁed at the molecular level,
although their possible roles in Ca2+ wave transmission
remain to be explored. This Ca2+ contributes to the ac-
tivation of TPC1, resulting, directly or indirectly, in the
release of more Ca2+ from the vacuole. ROS and Ca2+
diffuse within the apoplast and cytoplasm, respec-
tively, activating neighboring channels until all the in-
volved signaling proteins within a cell have been
activated. The signaling molecules are able to diffuse
between cells, ROS through the apoplast and Ca2+
through the plasmodesmata, where signaling in the next
cell is activated. In the TPC1 overexpressor, the quantity
of TPC1 channels is increased (Peiter et al., 2005),
resulting in more Ca2+ being released and faster activa-
tion of RBOHDs and, therefore, a faster wave. Within the
tpc1-2 mutant background, RBOHD and the plasma
membrane Ca2+ channel form a linked propagation
system. The observation that high concentrations of as-
corbate can abolish the Ca2+ wave suggests that Ca2+
alone is insufﬁcient to propagate the Ca2+ wave;
therefore, in the rbohD mutant, it is possible that other
sources of ROS act to give rise to the lower velocity wave.
While the modeling work presented here assumes
ROS propagation through the apoplast, we cannot ex-
clude the possibility that Ca2+ diffusing through the
plasmodesmata is responsible for transmitting the sig-
nal between adjacent cells, or indeed that the two
Figure 6. Conceptual model of the propagation of
the salt stress-induced Ca2+/ROS waves. ROS
(green arrows) are produced in RBOHD (green
circles) and diffuse through the apoplast, activat-
ing ROS-sensitive Ca2+ channels in the plasma
membrane (light blue ellipse). These channels
release Ca2+ into the cytosol (blue arrows) that
activate TPC1 proteins (yellow circles), which,
directly or indirectly, mediate Ca2+ release from
the vacuole. Combined, this Ca2+ activates further
RBOHD proteins, giving rise to a self-propagating
ROS/Ca2+ wave. Passage between cells may be
mediated by either diffusion of ROS through the
apoplast or Ca2+ through the plasmodesmata.
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
1781
Modeling ROS and Calcium Waves

species act in tandem (Fig. 6). A TPC1-mediated CICR
wave acting alone seems unlikely, and that motivated
us to look at ROS propagation, but the requirement for
a ROS-activated plasma membrane Ca2+ channel means
there also could be sources of Ca2+ inﬂux within the
plasmodesmatal plasma membrane itself that could
contribute to a rapid transmission event. Unfortunately,
the resolution of current imaging techniques is unable
to distinguish these possibilities.
TPC1 and AtRBOHD are expressed ubiquitously
throughout the plant, so their distribution does not
provide an obvious explanation for why the salt-
induced Ca2+ wave preferentially transits through the
cortical and endodermal cell layers. Similarly, candi-
dates for the putative ROS-activated Ca2+-release chan-
nels, such as annexins and SKOR (Garcia-Mata et al.,
2010; Richards et al., 2014), also are expressed
throughout the root (Birnbaum et al., 2003). Thus,
identifying the ROS-regulated channels involved with
this signaling process, as well as other components that
provide regulatory roles, represents a key challenge for
the future that may provide important insights into the
tissue-speciﬁc pattern of the Ca2+ wave.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant Growth
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ecotype Columbia-0 (Col-0), mutants in
AtRBOHD and TPC1 in the Col-0 background, and the TPC1 overexpression
line (in the Col-0 background) were germinated and grown under sterile
conditions on a thin layer of gel (approximately 2 mm thick) containing one-
half-strength Epstein’s medium with 10 mM Suc and 0.5% (w/v) Phytagel
(Sigma-Aldrich) under 16 h of light/8 h of dark at 22°C for 6 d as described
previously (Choi et al., 2014). AtrbohD was kindly provided by Dr. Andrew
Bent (University of Wisconsin-Madison), and oxTPC1 and tpc1-2 were provided
by Edgar Peiter (Martin-Luther-Universität) and Dale Sanders (John Innes
Centre) and transformed with Yellow Cameleon Nano-65 GFP Ca2+ bioreporter
as reported previously (Choi et al., 2014).
Ratio Imaging
Confocal ratio imaging was performed as described by Choi et al. (2014).
Brieﬂy, 7-d-old seedlings were grown as described above and imaged using a
203/0.75 Plan-Apochromat objective on a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope,
with 458-nm excitation, 458-nm primary dichroic, and 462- to 505-nm (CFP) and
526- to 537-nm (cpVenus/FRET) emission selected using the microscope’s Meta
detector. Images were analyzed using the Image Calculator in the FIJI analysis
package (Schindelin et al., 2012), and ratio data from the sequential confocal
images were converted to a pseudocolored kymogram using MultiExperiment
Viewer software version 10.2 (Saeed et al., 2003). Due to uncertainties in the
applicability of in vitro calibration of this reporter to in vivo responsiveness,
data are presented as raw ratios of YFP (cpVenus) to CFP signal intensities.
Increasing YFP-CFP ratio signal represents an increase in Ca2+ levels.
Measuring Extracellular ROS with OxyBurst Green-BSA
Extracellular ROS production was measured essentially as described by
Monshausen et al. (2009). A total of 200 mg mL21 OxyBurst Green (dihydro-
29,4,5,6,7,79-hexaﬂuoroﬂuorescein)-BSA
(Life
Technologies)
dissolved
in
growth medium was added to the root approximately 10 min prior to treatment
at the root tip. A ROI of 50 3 50 mm was then imaged either 3,000 or 5,000 mm
from the root tip using a 203/0.75 Plan-Apochromat objective on a Zeiss
LSM780 confocal microscope, using 458-nm primary dichroic, 458-nm excita-
tion, and 526- to 537-nm emission using the microscope’s Meta detector.
Inhibitor Treatments
For inhibitor treatments, a small window (approximately 500 mm 3 500 mm)
was made in the gel in the middle region of the root, shootward of the root tip,
using the tip of a syringe needle as a knife to carefully remove the gel using a
dissecting microscope. Ten microliters of 25 to 200 mM DPI (NADPH oxidase
inhibitor) or potassium ascorbate (ROS scavenger) made up in one-half-
strength Epstein’s medium with 10 mM Suc was added to the gel window
30 min prior to salt treatment of the root tip. Control plants were treated sim-
ilarly, but with 25 mL of one-half-strength Epstein’s medium with 10 mM Suc in
the window. To prevent the gel from drying out, these samples were kept in a
humid petri dish prior to confocal imaging.
Total RNA Isolation and Quantitative Real-Time
PCR Analysis
For QPCR analysis, root and shoot samples of 6-d-old seedlings of wild-type
Col-0 and oxTPC1 were harvested in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was then
isolated from 50- to 200-mg tissue samples using the RNeasy Plant Mini Kit
(Qiagen) followed by removing residual genomic DNA using the TURBO
DNase Kit (RNase-free DNase I; Ambion) according to the manufacturer’s in-
structions. Total RNA (1–2 mg) was reverse transcribed into ﬁrst-strand com-
plementary DNA in a 40-mL reaction (25–50 ng total RNA mL21) with
ProtoScript II reverse transcriptase (New England Biolabs). QPCR analysis was
done using an Applied Biosystems 7500 Real Time PCR system, and analysis
was performed with the 7500 Software version 2.3 (Applied Biosystems). The
Arabidopsis UBQ10 gene was used as an internal reference for standardization
as described previously (Choi et al., 2014). First-strand complementary DNA
proportional to 10 ng of genomic DNA-free starting total RNA was combined
with 200 nM of each primer and 7.5 mL of 23 EvaGreen QPCR Master Mix with
ROX passive reference dye (Biotium) in a ﬁnal volume of 15 mL. QPCR was
performed on a 96-well optical PCR plate (ABgene) using the following pa-
rameters: one cycle of 15 min at 95°C; 40 cycles of 20 s at 95°C, 30 s at 58°C, and
15 s at 65°C; and one cycle of dissociation from 58°C to 95°C with 0.5°C in-
crements. Quantitation of the expression of AtTPC1 was calculated using the
comparative threshold cycle method as described previously (Choi et al., 2014).
The QPCR primers used are AtUBQ10-qPCR-F (UBQ10 forward primer, 59-
CACACTCCACTTGGTCTTGCGT-39),
AtUBQ10-qPCR-R
(UBQ10
reverse
primer, 59-TGGTCTTTCCGGTGAGAGTCTTCA-39), AtTPC1-qPCR-F(i) (TPC1
forward primer, 59-GCTCTATTGGCGTACAGGTCTTTG-39), and AtTPC1-
qPCR-R(j) (TPC1 reverse primer, 59-GAAGAGTGTGACCATTCCATTGG-39).
Mathematical Modeling
A full simulation of the CICR model, illustrated in Figure 1A, uses Equation
1 assuming a fast Ca2+ release. Under this assumption, each release site xi ﬁring
at ti contributes
ci ¼
s
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4pDðt 2 tiÞ
p
e
2 ðx 2 xiÞ2
4Dðt 2 tiÞ
to a reference point at position x and at time t. The total concentration is the sum
of these terms over all Ca2+ releases, i, cðx; tÞ ¼ ∑
i
ci. This method requires
calculation of the ﬁring times of all releases and, therefore, places an upper limit
on the temporal step size of the algorithm. We typically used a step size Dt = 1026 s.
Concentrations, c, were scaled by the ﬁring threshold, uc, c →c=uc. Simulations
were performed with code developed in C++ using the GNU science library
root-ﬁnding function to ﬁt the model to observed wave velocities.
Supplemental Data
The following supplemental materials are available.
Supplemental Figure S1. Effects of different parameters on the CICR
model.
Supplemental Figure S2. TPC1 expression in root and shoot tissues of
young seedlings.
Supplemental Figure S3. Ca2+ wave transmission rate in the atrbohD
background.
1782
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.

Supplemental Figure S4. Calcium wave propagation in the oxTPC1 back-
ground pretreated with DPI.
Supplemental Movie S1. Surface ROS production in response to medium
addition to the root tip.
Supplemental Movie S2. Surface ROS production in response to NaCl
addition to the root tip.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Newcomb Imaging Center, Department of Botany, University
of Wisconsin, for Ca2+ and ROS imaging.
Received February 9, 2016; accepted June 2, 2016; published June 3, 2016.
LITERATURE CITED
Allbritton NL, Meyer T, Stryer L (1992) Range of messenger action of
calcium ion and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Science 258: 1812–1815
Allen GJ, Sanders D (1996) Control of ionic currents in guard cell vacuoles
by cytosolic and luminal calcium. Plant J 10: 1055–1069
Alvarez ME, Pennell RI, Meijer PJ, Ishikawa A, Dixon RA, Lamb C (1998)
Reactive oxygen intermediates mediate a systemic signal network in the
establishment of plant immunity. Cell 92: 773–784
Beyhl D, Hörtensteiner S, Martinoia E, Farmer EE, Fromm J, Marten I,
Hedrich R (2009) The fou2 mutation in the major vacuolar cation
channel TPC1 confers tolerance to inhibitory luminal calcium. Plant J 58:
715–723
Bienert GP, Schjoerring JK, Jahn TP (2006) Membrane transport of hy-
drogen peroxide. Biochim Biophys Acta 1758: 994–1003
Birnbaum K, Shasha DE, Wang JY, Jung JW, Lambert GM, Galbraith DW,
Benfey PN (2003) A gene expression map of the Arabidopsis root. Sci-
ence 302: 1956–1960
Carpaneto A, Cantù AM, Gambale F (1999) Redox agents regulate ion
channel activity in vacuoles from higher plant cells. FEBS Lett 442: 129–
132
Choi WG, Toyota M, Kim SH, Hilleary R, Gilroy S (2014) Salt stress-
induced Ca2+ waves are associated with rapid, long-distance root-to-
shoot signaling in plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111: 6497–6502
Christmann A, Weiler EW, Steudle E, Grill E (2007) A hydraulic signal in
root-to-shoot signalling of water shortage. Plant J 52: 167–174
Coombes S, Hinch R, Timofeeva Y (2004) Receptors, sparks and waves in a
ﬁre-diffuse-ﬁre framework for calcium release. Prog Biophys Mol Biol
85: 197–216
Dadacz-Narloch B, Beyhl D, Larisch C, López-Sanjurjo EJ, Reski R,
Kuchitsu K, Müller TD, Becker D, Schönknecht G, Hedrich R (2011) A
novel calcium binding site in the slow vacuolar cation channel TPC1
senses luminal calcium levels. Plant Cell 23: 2696–2707
Demidchik V, Maathuis FJ (2007) Physiological roles of nonselective cation
channels in plants: from salt stress to signalling and development. New
Phytol 175: 387–404
Dempsey DA, Klessig DF (2012) SOS: too many signals for systemic ac-
quired resistance? Trends Plant Sci 17: 538–545
Dubiella U, Seybold H, Durian G, Komander E, Lassig R, Witte CP,
Schulze WX, Romeis T (2013) Calcium-dependent protein kinase/
NADPH oxidase activation circuit is required for rapid defense signal
propagation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110: 8744–8749
Farmer EE, Gasperini D, Acosta IF (2014) The squeeze cell hypothesis for
the activation of jasmonate synthesis in response to wounding. New
Phytol 204: 282–288
Felle HH, Zimmermann MR (2007) Systemic signalling in barley through
action potentials. Planta 226: 203–214
Foreman J, Demidchik V, Bothwell JH, Mylona P, Miedema H, Torres
MA, Linstead P, Costa S, Brownlee C, Jones JD, et al (2003) Reactive
oxygen species produced by NADPH oxidase regulate plant cell growth.
Nature 422: 442–446
Garcia-Mata C, Wang J, Gajdanowicz P, Gonzalez W, Hills A, Donald
N, Riedelsberger J, Amtmann A, Dreyer I, Blatt MR (2010) A mini-
mal cysteine motif required to activate the SKOR K+ channel of
Arabidopsis by the reactive oxygen species H2O2. J Biol Chem 285:
29286–29294
Gattolin S, Sorieul M, Hunter PR, Khonsari RH, Frigerio L (2009) In vivo
imaging of the tonoplast intrinsic protein family in Arabidopsis roots.
BMC Plant Biol 9: 133
Gilroy S, Suzuki N, Miller G, Choi WG, Toyota M, Devireddy AR,
Mittler R (2014) A tidal wave of signals: calcium and ROS at the fore-
front of rapid systemic signaling. Trends Plant Sci 19: 623–630
Gradogna A, Scholz-Starke J, Gutla PVK, Carpaneto A (2009) Fluores-
cence combined with excised patch: measuring calcium currents in plant
cation channels. Plant J 58: 175–182
Guo J, Zeng W, Chen Q, Lee C, Chen L, Yang Y, Cang C, Ren D, Jiang Y
(2016) Structure of the voltage-gated two-pore channel TPC1 from
Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 531: 196–201
Guo WJ, Nagy R, Chen HY, Pfrunder S, Yu YC, Santelia D, Frommer WB,
Martinoia E (2014) SWEET17, a facilitative transporter, mediates fruc-
tose transport across the tonoplast of Arabidopsis roots and leaves.
Plant Physiol 164: 777–789
Han S, Tang R, Anderson LK, Woerner TE, Pei ZM (2003) A cell surface
receptor mediates extracellular Ca2+ sensing in guard cells. Nature 425:
196–200
Hao H, Fan L, Chen T, Li R, Li X, He Q, Botella MA, Lin J (2014) Clathrin
and membrane microdomains cooperatively regulate RbohD dynamics
and activity in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 26: 1729–1745
Hedrich R, Marten I (2011) TPC1-SV channels gain shape. Mol Plant 4: 428–
441
Hedrich R, Neher E (1987) Cytoplasmic calcium regulates voltage-
dependent ion channels in plant vacuoles. Nature 329: 833–836
Hunter PR, Craddock CP, Di Benedetto S, Roberts LM, Frigerio L (2007)
Fluorescent reporter proteins for the tonoplast and the vacuolar lumen
identify a single vacuolar compartment in Arabidopsis cells. Plant
Physiol 145: 1371–1382
Kärkönen A, Kuchitsu K (2015) Reactive oxygen species in cell wall me-
tabolism and development in plants. Phytochemistry 112: 22–32
Karpinski S, Reynolds H, Karpinska B, Wingsle G, Creissen G,
Mullineaux P (1999) Systemic signaling and acclimation in response to
excess excitation energy in Arabidopsis. Science 284: 654–657
Keizer J, Smith GD, Ponce-Dawson S, Pearson JE (1998) Saltatory prop-
agation of Ca2+ waves by Ca2+ sparks. Biophys J 75: 595–600
Kiep V, Vadassery J, Lattke J, Maass JP, Boland W, Peiter E, Mithofer A
(2015) Systemic cytosolic Ca(2+) elevation is activated upon wounding
and herbivory in Arabidopsis. New Phytol 207: 996–1004
Kintzer AF, Stroud RM (2016) Structure, inhibition and regulation of two-
pore channel TPC1 from Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 531: 258–262
Macklon AES, Lumsdon DG, Sim A, Mchardy WJ (1996) Phosphate ﬂuxes,
compartmentation and vacuolar speciation in root cortex cells of intact
Agrostis capillaris seedlings: effect of non-toxic levels of aluminium. J Exp
Bot 47: 793–803
Miller G, Schlauch K, Tam R, Cortes D, Torres MA, Shulaev V, Dangl
JL, Mittler R (2009) The plant NADPH oxidase RBOHD mediates
rapid systemic signaling in response to diverse stimuli. Sci Signal 2:
ra45
Moghaddam PR, Wilman D (1998) Cell wall thickness and cell dimensions
in plant parts of eight forage species. J Agric Sci 131: 59–67
Monshausen GB, Bibikova TN, Messerli MA, Shi C, Gilroy S (2007)
Oscillations in extracellular pH and reactive oxygen species modulate
tip growth of Arabidopsis root hairs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104:
20996–21001
Monshausen GB, Bibikova TN, Weisenseel MH, Gilroy S (2009) Ca2+
regulates reactive oxygen species production and pH during mechano-
sensing in Arabidopsis roots. Plant Cell 21: 2341–2356
Mousavi SA, Chauvin A, Pascaud F, Kellenberger S, Farmer EE (2013)
GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR-LIKE genes mediate leaf-to-leaf wound sig-
nalling. Nature 500: 422–426
Nomura H, Komori T, Kobori M, Nakahira Y, Shiina T (2008) Evidence for
chloroplast control of external Ca2+-induced cytosolic Ca2+ transients
and stomatal closure. Plant J 53: 988–998
Ordoñez NM, Marondedze C, Thomas L, Pasqualini S, Shabala L,
Shabala S, Gehring C (2014) Cyclic mononucleotides modulate potas-
sium and calcium ﬂux responses to H2O2 in Arabidopsis roots. FEBS Lett
588: 1008–1015
Pearson JE, Ponce-Dawson S (1998) Crisis on Skid Row. Physica A 257:
141–148
Peiter E (2011) The plant vacuole: emitter and receiver of calcium signals.
Cell Calcium 50: 120–128
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
1783
Modeling ROS and Calcium Waves

Peiter E, Maathuis FJM, Mills LN, Knight H, Pelloux J, Hetherington AM,
Sanders D (2005) The vacuolar Ca2+-activated channel TPC1 regulates
germination and stomatal movement. Nature 434: 404–408
Ponce-Dawson S, Keizer J, Pearson JE (1999) Fire-diffuse-ﬁre model of
dynamics of intracellular calcium waves. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:
6060–6063
Pottosin I, Wherrett T, Shabala S (2009) SV channels dominate the vacu-
olar Ca2+ release during intracellular signaling. FEBS Lett 583: 921–926
Pottosin II, Schönknecht G (2007) Vacuolar calcium channels. J Exp Bot 58:
1559–1569
Ranf S, Wünnenberg P, Lee J, Becker D, Dunkel M, Hedrich R, Scheel D,
Dietrich P (2008) Loss of the vacuolar cation channel, AtTPC1, does not
impair Ca2+ signals induced by abiotic and biotic stresses. Plant J 53:
287–299
Richards SL, Laohavisit A, Mortimer JC, Shabala L, Swarbreck SM,
Shabala S, Davies JM (2014) Annexin 1 regulates the H2O2-induced
calcium signature in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. Plant J 77: 136–145
Riley KF, Hobson MP, Bence SJ (1998) Mathematical Methods for Physics
and Engineering, Ed 3. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
Saeed AI, Sharov V, White J, Li J, Liang W, Bhagabati N, Braisted J, Klapa
M, Currier T, Thiagarajan M, et al (2003) TM4: a free, open-source
system for microarray data management and analysis. Biotechniques
34: 374–378
Sagi M, Fluhr R (2006) Production of reactive oxygen species by plant
NADPH oxidases. Plant Physiol 141: 336–340
Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V, Longair M, Pietzsch
T, Preibisch S, Rueden C, Saalfeld S, Schmid B, et al (2012) Fiji: an
open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat Methods 9: 676–
682
Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW (2012) NIH Image to ImageJ:
25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods 9: 671–675
Scholz-Starke J, De Angeli A, Ferraretto C, Paluzzi S, Gambale F,
Carpaneto A (2004) Redox-dependent modulation of the carrot SV channel
by cytosolic pH. FEBS Lett 576: 449–454
Shuai JW, Jung P (2003) Optimal ion channel clustering for intracellular
calcium signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100: 506–510
Suzuki N, Miller G, Salazar C, Mondal HA, Shulaev E, Cortes DF,
Shuman JL, Luo X, Shah J, Schlauch K, et al (2013) Temporal-spatial
interaction between reactive oxygen species and abscisic acid regulates
rapid systemic acclimation in plants. Plant Cell 25: 3553–3569
Timofeeva Y, Coombes S (2003) Wave bifurcation and propagation failure
in a model of Ca2+ release. J Math Biol 47: 249–269
Torres MA, Dangl JL, Jones JDG (2002) Arabidopsis gp91phox homo-
logues AtrbohD and AtrbohF are required for accumulation of reactive
oxygen intermediates in the plant defense response. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 99: 517–522
van Bel AJ, Furch AC, Will T, Buxa SV, Musetti R, Hafke JB (2014) Spread
the news: systemic dissemination and local impact of Ca²⁺ signals along
the phloem pathway. J Exp Bot 65: 1761–1787
Vestergaard CL, Flyvbjerg H, Møller IM (2012) Intracellular signaling by
diffusion: can waves of hydrogen peroxide transmit intracellular infor-
mation in plant cells? Front Plant Sci 3: 295
Ward JM, Schroeder JI (1994) Calcium-activated K+ channels and calcium-
induced calcium release by slow vacuolar ion channels in guard cell
vacuoles implicated in the control of stomatal closure. Plant Cell 6: 669–
683
Weinl S, Held K, Schlücking K, Steinhorst L, Kuhlgert S, Hippler M,
Kudla J (2008) A plastid protein crucial for Ca2+-regulated stomatal
responses. New Phytol 179: 675–686
Werner T, Motyka V, Laucou V, Smets R, Van Onckelen H, Schmülling T
(2003) Cytokinin-deﬁcient transgenic Arabidopsis plants show multiple
developmental alterations indicating opposite functions of cytokinins in
the regulation of shoot and root meristem activity. Plant Cell 15: 2532–
2550
Zhang Y, Zhu H, Zhang Q, Li M, Yan M, Wang R, Wang L, Welti R,
Zhang W, Wang X (2009) Phospholipase Da1 and phosphatidic acid
regulate NADPH oxidase activity and production of reactive oxygen
species in ABA-mediated stomatal closure in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 21:
2357–2377
Zimmermann MR, Maischak H, Mithöfer A, Boland W, Felle HH (2009)
System potentials, a novel electrical long-distance apoplastic signal in
plants, induced by wounding. Plant Physiol 149: 1593–1600
1784
Plant Physiol. Vol. 171, 2016
Evans et al.
