Research article
Asparagine biosynthesis as a mechanism of increased host lethality induced
by Serratia marcescens in simulated microgravity environments
Rachel Gilbert a, Nicole Tanenbaum b, Sharmila Bhattacharya c,*
a NASA Postdoctoral Program, Universities Space Research Association, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA
b Dept. of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
c NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Low shear modeled microgravity
Drosophila melanogaster
Serratia marcescens
Asparagine
Virulence
A B S T R A C T
While studies have shown an increase in pathogenicity in several microbes during spaceﬂight and after exposure
to simulated microgravity, the mechanisms underlying these changes in phenotype are not understood across
different pathogens, particularly in opportunistic pathogens. This study evaluates the mechanism for increased
virulence of the opportunistic gram-negative bacterium, Serratia marcescens, in simulated microgravity. Low-shear
modeled microgravity (LSMMG) is used in ground-based studies to simulate the effects of microgravity as
experienced in spaceﬂight. Our previous ﬁndings showed that there was a signiﬁcant increase in mortality rates of
the Drosophila melanogaster host when infected with either spaceﬂight or LSMMG treated S. marcescens. Here, we
report that LSMMG increases asparagine uptake and synthesis in S. marcescens and that the increased host lethality
induced by LSMMG bacteria grown in rich media can be recapitulated in minimal media by adding only aspartate
and glutamine, the substrates of asparagine biosynthesis. Interestingly, increased bacterial growth rate alone is
not sufﬁcient to contribute to maximal host lethality, since the addition of aspartate to minimal media caused an
LSMMG-speciﬁc increase in bacterial growth rate that is comparable to that induced by the combination of
aspartate and glutamine, but this increase in growth does not cause an equivalent rate of host mortality. However,
the addition of both aspartate and glutamine cause both an increase in host mortality and an overexpression of
asparagine pathway genes in a LSMMG-dependent manner. We also report that L-asparaginase-mediated break-
down of asparagine is an effective countermeasure for the increased host mortality caused by LSMMG-treated
bacteria. This investigation underscores the importance of the asparagine utilization pathway by helping un-
cover molecular mechanisms that underlie increased mortality rates of a model host infected with microgravity-
treated S. marcescens and provides a potential mitigation strategy.
1. Introduction
Human pathogens occupy a wide variety of ecological niches,
including those in the harsh conditions imposed by spaceﬂight. Under-
standing the effects that spaceﬂight may have on the adaptation and
ﬁtness of human pathogens is necessary to predict potential causes of
health problems during future missions, where the availability of treat-
ment and prevention options is limited. This is even more important in
the context of opportunistic bacterial pathogens, which typically produce
benign infections, until they are challenged by certain environmental
conditions or when host immune impairments occur, which can then
equip them with the ability to cause serious health concerns [1]. One
such
environmental
condition
is
spaceﬂight,
which
has
been
demonstrated to convert opportunistic pathogens to primary pathogens,
enabling them to take advantage of a compromised immune system that
may occur to astronauts during spaceﬂight [2, 3]. In line with this, there
is mounting evidence that primary bacterial pathogens often undergo a
diversity of signiﬁcant phenotypic shifts during spaceﬂight, including
increased antibiotic resistance [4, 5, 6, 7], increased virulence [8, 9, 10,
11], and morphological changes associated with pathogenicity [12].
Despite mounting research in these primary pathogens, much less is
known about phenotypic shifts that occur to opportunistic pathogens
when exposed to microgravity. Speciﬁcally, there is little known about
how pathogens may be utilizing nutrients differently in the microgravity
environment of space compared to ground microbes, and potentially how
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: sharmila.bhattacharya@nasa.gov (S. Bhattacharya).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Heliyon
journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09379
Received 8 July 2021; Received in revised form 15 March 2022; Accepted 28 April 2022
2405-8440/Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379

these mechanistic changes might be inﬂuencing the host immune
response during infection.
Due to increased nosocomial reports, the human opportunistic bac-
teria, Serratia marcescens, has emerged as a model for studying rapid
shifts in virulence and antibiotic resistance [13, 14]. S. marcescens is a
ubiquitous pathogen that occupies a wide variety of habitats and hosts. It
can adapt quickly to antibiotics independently and simultaneously,
which is likely due to the loss of conserved genetic elements and large
genomic diversity among strains [14, 15, 16]. Furthermore, S. marcescens
was found aboard the spacecraft Mir, and in condensed water aboard the
International Space Station [17, 18]. Therefore, this ubiquitous pathogen
should be monitored closely for spaceﬂight-induced changes that may
pose a threat to immunocompromised astronauts that are more suscep-
tible to opportunistic pathogens and especially considering the compli-
cations with antibiotic resistance [2, 18].
Research in our laboratory has demonstrated that there is a signiﬁ-
cant shift in virulence with S. marcescens (Db11) after spaceﬂight. When
cultured aboard the International Space Station, S. marcescens Db11 kil-
led healthy ground-reared Drosophila melanogaster hosts signiﬁcantly
faster than an identical control of the bacteria that was cultured on the
ground [11]. However, the speciﬁc mechanisms of increased Db11
virulence and reduced D. melanogaster survival are currently unknown. In
line with this, increased virulence is observed with various space and
low-shear modeled microgravity (LSMMG)-isolated bacteria, including
studies with Salmonella [19], and Staphylococcus aureus [20], which pose
a threat to astronaut health during spaceﬂight. Our prior research has
shown that Serratia marcescens also shows a signiﬁcant increase in host
lethality of D. melanogaster after growth in simulated microgravity
(LSMMG) conditions [11].
Since spaceﬂight studies are costly and can be difﬁcult to perform due
to constraints on experimental design and the availability of spaceﬂight
opportunities, many researchers perform ground-based studies using
devices such as the rotating wall vessel (RWV) to simulate microgravity
[21, 22, 23]. The RWV simulates microgravity by rotating at a speed and
orientation which keeps cells suspended in liquid without bubbles,
thereby creating a low ﬂuid shear environment that simulates the
weightlessness that cells experience during spaceﬂight [24] and is
referred to as the LSMMG treatment. When using the RWV to induce
LSMMG, the vessel is rotated such that the axis of rotation is perpen-
dicular to the gravity vector and the rotation offsets the sedimental ef-
fects of gravity and keeps the cells in continuous suspension (LSMMG). In
contrast, in the control orientation (RWV-Control), the axis of rotation is
parallel to the gravity vector and does not offset the sedimentation
induced by Earth's gravitational force. Thus, in the RWV-Control, the
cells can settle at the bottom of the container and experience Earth
gravity (1g) without continuous suspension while acting as a control for
any potential biological effects of the vessel itself. Although this method
is not an exact recreation of the spaceﬂight environment, the effects of
the LSMMG environment have been demonstrated to recapitulate ﬁnd-
ings from spaceﬂight studies [10, 11].
Drosophila melanogaster, as used in this study, has proven to be a
useful host model for spaceﬂight and ground-based studies in the past.
This is due to their well-characterized innate immune system, tractable
genetics, ease of use, short life-cycle, genetic homology to mammalian
systems, and low resource requirements for breeding large colonies [11,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35].
In the current study, we use LSMMG to investigate the speciﬁc
mechanisms that enable microgravity-treated Serratia marcescens bacte-
ria to kill the host D. melanogaster more quickly than control bacterial
cultures. A screen of several genes related to known S. marcescens viru-
lence factors did not reveal any differences of expression in LSMMG
compared to RWV-Control. Further testing revealed a LSMMG-dependent
overexpression of the gene asparagine synthetase B (asnB), which is
implicated in virulence and resistance to drugs in other pathogenic
bacteria [36, 37]. This gene is involved with amino acid metabolism and
has been linked to both pathogen growth and virulence [38]. Amino
acids like asparagine are thought to be important to the competition
between hosts and pathogens in determining the outcome of an infection
[38]. Since our previous study indicated that the LSMMG-reared
S. marcescens killed the host faster after infection [11] than control
S. marcescens cultures, we wanted to explore whether the asparagine
pathway might be linked to the increased host mortality caused by
LSMMG treatment.
Here, we show that LSMMG treatment causes a change in the
expression of key asparagine pathway related genes in S. marcescens with
a concomitant increase in host mortality. Further, we ﬁnd that these
changes in key asparagine pathway genes and increased host mortality
can be recapitulated in an LSMMG-speciﬁc manner by the addition of
aspartate and glutamine (the substrates of asparagine synthesis) to
minimal media. We also show that the addition of L-asparaginase, which
catabolizes asparagine, can mitigate the LSMMG-induced increase in host
virulence. Thus, this study allows us to understand the phenotypic shifts
occurring in microbes exposed to altered gravity, and more speciﬁcally,
how amino acid metabolism may affect the mortality rate of the host. In
addition, these results will allow us to explore the asparagine pathway
further and develop countermeasures that target amino acid biosynthesis
in opportunistic pathogens such as S. marcescens, as an essential consid-
eration to maintain host health during spaceﬂight.
2. Results
2.1. The asparagine pathway and extracellular asparagine and glutamine
concentrations are affected by simulated microgravity treatment of
S. marcescens
Our previous ﬁndings have indicated that S. marcescens exposed to
LSMMG for 24 h grow at a faster rate inside the host after infection and
caused increased host lethality in D.melanogaster [11]. First, we looked at
several genes involved in ﬂagella formation, membrane-bound proteins,
and known virulence genes, and did not see signiﬁcant upregulation in
LSMMG compared to the control bacteria (Table 3). We, therefore,
looked at other genes linked to bacterial growth mechanisms and found
that genes related to asparagine metabolism were upregulated in
LSMMG. More speciﬁcally, we found that there was a signiﬁcant upre-
gulation in asnB (asparagine synthetase B), which is a gene that regulates
the conversion of aspartate to asparagine using ATP and glutamine
(Figure 1A,B). Therefore, we evaluated the expression of genes that are
important for asparagine and glutamine metabolism. Gene expression
analyses showed that the expression level of the gene asnB (asparagine
synthetase B) was 39.17 fold higher in LSMMG-treated cells relative to
the RWV-control (P < 0.0001), as well as a 10.5 fold increase in
expression of L-asparaginase (L-ap, P ¼ 0.054), but there was no signif-
icant difference in expression for the other genes tested, although several
genes showed a positive trend for expression levels: L-ap1 (L-aspar-
aginase
1),
L-ap2
(L-asparaginase
2),
iaaA
(isoaspartyl
peptidase/L-asparaginase), or astL (asparagine tRNA ligase) (Figure 1D).
asnB is a gene that catalyzes the conversion of aspartate to asparagine
using ATP and glutamine, and is known to be linked to virulence and
antibiotic resistance in bacterial pathogens [36, 37]. The L-asparaginase
subunits assist with asparagine catabolism and nitrogen homeostasis
[39], therefore, an overexpression of these genes suggests that there is an
increase in asparagine catabolism as part of the overall homeostatic
regulation of the asparagine pathway.
The observation that asnB expression is signiﬁcantly increased, led us
to hypothesize that there is an increased presence of asparagine in
LSMMG that may contribute to the increase in pathogen growth rate, and
therefore an increase in consumption of glutamine and aspartate in the
media. To conﬁrm this, we quantiﬁed the rates at which S. marcescens
utilized extracellular glutamine and asparagine in the nutrient-rich LB
media, in order to see whether the consumption rates of these amino
acids matched the increased growth of the bacteria in LSMMG. For
asparagine measurements (Figure 1C), there was no difference between
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
2

the RWV-control and the LSMMG at 0 h (F ¼ 4.348, P ¼ 0.11) or at 14 h
(F ¼ 0.007, P ¼ 0.939). At 6 h of growth, LSMMG had signiﬁcantly lower
extracellular asparagine than the RWV-Control (F ¼ 1540.68, P <
0.0001). Similarly, extracellular glutamine (Figure 1D) was not signiﬁ-
cantly different at hours 0 (F ¼ 2.251, P ¼ 0.208) or 14 (F ¼ 0.669, P ¼
0.459), but LSMMG had signiﬁcantly lower glutamine at hour 6 (F ¼
282.056, P < 0.0001). These results suggest that the S. marcescens in
LSMMG are consuming extracellular glutamine and asparagine more
quickly during the active growth phase of the culture, which is consistent
with the increase in growth that we see in LSMMG-reared bacteria in rich
media [11].
Taken together, the almost 40-fold overexpression of the asnB gene in
LSMMG coupled with the overexpression of the asparaginase subunits
(Figure 1B), along with the increased consumption of asparagine
(Figure 1C), indicated that the asparagine pathway was likely to play a
signiﬁcant role in the phenotypic changes observed in S. marcescens
under reduced gravity LSMMG conditions.
2.2. S. marcescens growth is affected by L-asparaginase treatment in vitro
under simulated microgravity conditions
Since we saw an increase in asparagine consumption with LSMMG
treatment, we studied whether the depletion of exogenous L-asparagine
using the enzyme L-asparaginase would negatively inﬂuence growth in
LSMMG. When S. marcescens was grown in LSMMG with asparaginase,
growth was signiﬁcantly lower than the LSMMG without asparaginase at
hours 18 (P ¼ 0.034), 21 (P ¼ 0.0004), and 24 (P ¼ 0.0008) of growth
(Figure 2B). For the RWV-Control sample, asparaginase reduced growth
only at hour 15 (P ¼ 0.031), but not at any other timepoints. The LSMMG
þ asparaginase growth was signiﬁcantly lower than the RWV-Control at
hour 18 (P ¼ 0.0296) but was not signiﬁcantly different from the control
at any other time point (Figure 2B). These results provide evidence that L-
asparaginase reduces the growth of S. marcescens in the LSMMG condi-
tion compared to the control, but does not signiﬁcantly impact growth in
the control samples, suggesting that the growth-suppressive effect of L-
asparaginase is LSMMG-speciﬁc.
2.3. Injection of LSMMG S. marcescens with in vivo L-asparaginase
treatment reduces lethality in the D. melanogaster host
Next, since the synthesis of asparagine by S. marcescens was closely
linked with LSMMG treatment, we investigated whether L-asparaginase
could mitigate increased virulence of LSMMG-reared pathogens after
injection into a host as measured by host mortality. To do this, LSMMG or
RWV-Control-treated S. marcescens were injected into D. melanogaster
hosts, and the infected hosts were then injected again with L-aspar-
aginase 1 h after bacterial infection. There was no difference in overall ﬂy
survival between the LSMMG and the LSMMG þ asparaginase treatment
in the early part of the survival curve indicating that there was no
harmful effect from asparaginase injections of the host (Figure 2C, P ¼
0.0976). However, when the survival curve was analyzed for the latter
half of the experiment (12–24 h) when the majority of the host death
typically occurs from an S. marcescens infection, then there was a sig-
niﬁcant difference in survival with and without asparaginase treatment.
We demonstrated that the LSMMG-injected ﬂies died faster than the
LSMMG with asparaginase treatment (Figure 2C, Risk Ratio ¼ 2.92, P ¼
0.0197). There was no difference between the RWV-Control with water
or with asparaginase (Figure 2D, Risk Ratio ¼ 1.33, P ¼ 0.348). For the
complete result of this statistical analysis, please see Table 1. These re-
sults indicate that the addition of exogenous asparaginase into the host,
during
infection
with
S.
marcescens,
can
inhibit
the
increased
S. marcescens virulence that is associated with reduced gravity treatment
of the microbe (Figure 2C). L-asparaginase does not prevent host death
and does not affect the time-course of host lethality in the RWV-Control
Figure 1. The asparagine pathway and increased uptake of extracellular asparagine and glutamine from nutrient-rich LB media under simulated microgravity.
Measurements of amino acid consumption were performed by removing cells from media by centrifugation and utilizing spectrophotometric analysis with Megazyme™
reagent. A) The asparagine biosynthesis pathway. B) At the end of the growth period of S. marcescens in simulated microgravity (LSMMG orientation), gene expression
for each sample was measured via qPCR: L-ap (L-asparaginase), L-ap1 (L-asparaginase 1), L-ap2 (L-asparaginase 2), asnB (asparagine synthetase B), iaaA (isoaspartyl
peptidase/L-asparaginase), or astL (asparagine tRNA ligase). Expression values are reported as fold change relative to the RWV-Control orientation and calculated
using the ΔΔ Ct method. Speciﬁc genes represented by the blue end of the color spectrum indicated gene overexpression and those towards the red end indicated
inhibition of gene expression. Error bars represent one standard error. Measurements of C) extracellular asparagine and D) extracellular glutamine were performed at
hours 0, 6, and 14 of growth in the rotating wall vessel, with an initial starting concentration of 1  108 CFU.
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
3

bacteria (Figure 2D), but it does target the gravity-speciﬁc increase in
host lethality by S. marcescens that we have shown in our previous study
[11].
2.4. Both aspartate and glutamine supplementation in combination are
required in minimal media to recapitulate the asparagine pathway gene
expression changes seen in rich media
Next, we examined the effect of speciﬁc amino acids that are sub-
strates in the asparagine synthesis pathway, on bacterial growth kinetics
and gene expression. To do this, we grew S. marcescens in a minimal
media supplemented with glutamine, aspartate, or both amino acids
together, in LSMMG and in the RWV-Control. For all amino acid growth
measures, there was no signiﬁcant difference between the LSMMG and
RWV-Control S. marcescens, except for the aspartate-supplemented sam-
ple at 24 h (Figure 3D, F ¼ 1.76, P ¼ 0.0023). This suggests that aspartate
in isolation is sufﬁcient to stimulate the LSMMG-speciﬁc increase in
growth.
However, when we looked at how these growth conditions inﬂuenced
gene expression, the expression level of 38.95 relative to the RWV-control
was signiﬁcantly higher for the gene asnB (asparagine synthetase B) in the
combined glutamine and aspartate supplemented media but not in the
media with either glutamine or aspartate alone (Figure 3E, P < 0.0001).
Similarly, the gene L-ap (L-asparaginase) with a relative expression value
of 21.45 was signiﬁcantly higher in the combined media than in the
glutamine or aspartate media alone (P < 0.0001). There was no signiﬁcant
difference across media conditions for the other genes tested: L-ap1 (L-
asparaginase 1), L-ap2 (L-asparaginase 2), iaaA (isoaspartyl peptidase/L-
asparaginase), or astL (asparagine tRNA ligase). This suggests that while
aspartate alone can increase the growth of S. marcescens in LSMMG in
minimal media, the presence of both aspartate and glutamine are neces-
sary to induce the LSMMG-speciﬁc overexpression of asnB at a similar
level to the nutrient-rich media (Figure 1B and Figure 3E).
Figure 2. Exogenously added L-asparaginase can inhibit growth of LSMMG-treated bacteria and reduce host-lethality. A) The breakdown of asparagine catalyzed by
the asparaginase enzyme. B) The starting concentration of 1  108 CFU of S. marcescens was placed in a 10 mL rotating wall vessel at 37 C in LB media. One hundred
microliters of L-asparaginase was added to the growth media, and growth of bacteria estimated by absorbance at 600 nm was measured every 3 h. L-asparaginase
addition in vitro reduces the rate of growth most signiﬁcantly in the LSMMG samples. Error bars represent one standard error. C and D) Bacteria were grown in RWV
with LB media only. After 24 h of growth, bacteria were ﬁxed in 20% glycerol for injections. Flies were injected with S. marcescens. One hour after infection, ﬂies were
then injected with a treatment of L-asparaginase, or sterile water (no treatment). The LSMMG bacteria kills ﬂies at a lower rate when L-asparaginase is injected in vivo
(C) and similarly in vivo injected L-asparaginase does not impact survival of the RWV-Control (D). (The statistical results for the comparisons shown in Figures 2C and
2D are included in Table 1.)
Table 1. Results of the proportional hazards survival model for the asparaginase
treatment injections (Figure 2). ‘Ratio’ refers to the ratio of the hazard rates
corresponding to the conditions described by Level 1 and Level 2, respectively.
This value can be interpreted as a magnitude of differences in survival between
Level 1 and Level 2. Hours 1–24 refers to the full analysis of all 24 data points for
the survival experiment, 24 h total. Hours 12–24 refers to the ﬁnal 12 h of the
experiment, which is when the majority of the death in the survival analysis
occurs. This distinction is made due to the effects of the treatment being applied
in this experiment, which has the strongest effect during this time period.
Level1
Level2
Risk Ratio
Prob > Chisq
Hours 1–24 Post-infection
1g-water
1g-asparaginase
1.3352328
0.3485
LSMMG-asparaginase
1g-asparaginase
5.5078408
<.0001*
LSMMG-asparaginase
1g-water
4.125004
<.0001*
LSMMG-water
1g-asparaginase
5.5609204
<.0001*
LSMMG-water
1g-water
4.1647571
<.0001*
LSMMG-water
LSMMG-asparaginase
1.0096371
0.9766
Hours 12–24 Post-infection
1g-water
1g-asparaginase
1.4371124
0.3784
LSMMG-asparaginase
1g-asparaginase
1.4095858
0.4001
LSMMG-water
1g-asparaginase
4.1156768
0.0018*
LSMMG-water
1g-water
2.8638518
0.0134*
LSMMG-water
LSMMG-asparaginase
2.9197774
0.0197*
1g-water
LSMMG-asparaginase
1.0195281
0.9627
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
4

2.5. Maximal host mortality rates of D. melanogaster are seen only when
minimal media is supplemented with aspartate and glutamine, substrates of
asparagine synthesis
Given the signiﬁcantly increased expression of asnB in LSMMG-grown
bacteria in minimal media supplemented with both aspartate and
glutamine, it was important to test whether bacteria grown in this way
would also increase its virulence in the D. melanogaster host. In the
minimal media supplemented with both aspartate and glutamine, ﬂies
injected with the bacteria grown in LSMMG died faster than those
injected with bacteria grown in the RWV-Control (Ratio ¼ 2.46, P ¼
0.0021, Figure 4A). Similarly, the media with aspartate supplementation
showed an increase in the rate of ﬂy death after injection with the
LSMMG-grown bacteria compared to the control (Ratio ¼ 2.26, P ¼
0.007, Figure 4B). For the LSMMG-grown bacteria, there was a greater
rate of ﬂy death from the bacteria grown in aspartate and glutamine
media compared to the bacteria grown in aspartate alone (Ratio ¼ 1.98, P
¼ 0.0221, Figure 4A,B). There is no signiﬁcant difference in mortality
rates between the ﬂies injected with bacteria reared in LSMMG with a
media composition composed of just the Davis minimal media (P ¼ 0.46)
or in the minimal media with just glutamine added (P ¼ 0.55, Figure 4C).
The full results of these comparisons can be seen in Table 2. This in-
dicates that while either aspartate alone or both aspartate and glutamine
together, can cause an increase in bacterial growth rate in vitro, only the
combination of the two amino acids together can cause the LSMMG-
speciﬁc induction of asnB expression and also causes the maximum in-
crease in LSMMG-dependent virulence of the bacteria in terms of mor-
tality of the ﬂy host (Figures 3 and 4). In other words, the increased
growth rate in the LSMMG is not a complete determinant for the
increased virulence of S. marcescens, but that a change in the metabolism
of nutrients like asparagine plays a critical role in the heightened mor-
tality induced by gravity-treated bacteria on a host.
3. Discussion
In this study, we provide evidence for the importance of nutrient
utilization during bacterial growth as a factor for increased host mortality
after pathogen growth in LSMMG. Host mortality is a direct measure of
Figure 3. Growth and gene expression changes of LSMMG-treated S. marcescens in Davis minimal media supplemented with amino acids. Starting concentration of 1 
108 CFU of S. marcescens was placed in a 10 mL rotating wall vessel at 37 C, containing A) Davis minimal media only, B) Davis minimal media supplemented with 10
mM aspartate and 10 mM glutamine, C) Davis minimal media supplemented with 10 mM glutamine, and D) Davis minimal media supplemented with 10 mM
aspartate. Growth was measured every 24 h for 72 h. E) At the end of growth period, gene expression for each sample was measured via qPCR:: L-ap (L-asparaginase),
L-ap1 (L-asparaginase 1), L-ap2 (L-asparaginase 2), asnB (asparagine synthetase B), iaaA (isoaspartyl peptidase/L-asparaginase), or astL (asparagine tRNA ligase).
Expression values are reported as fold change in LSMMG relative to the Davis minimal media values and calculated using the ΔΔ Ct method. Even though aspartate
addition increases growth in LSMMG cultures but asnB and L-ap genes are overexpressed in LSMMG compared to control only when both glutamine and aspartate
are present.
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
5

pathogen virulence, and therefore an increased rate of host death is one
indication of increased virulence of a pathogen [40]. While there are
studies showing an increase in virulence of pathogens after exposure to
spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity, the speciﬁc mechanisms that
underlie these changes are largely unknown. In our previous study [11],
we found that S. marcescens in spaceﬂight and in LSMMG show an in-
crease in virulence via increased rate of host mortality, and that the in
vivo growth of the pathogen after infection of the host is higher from both
spaceﬂight and LSMMG treated bacteria. While in vivo growth is only an
indirect proxy for virulence, faster pathogen growth immediately
following infection is often linked to the ability of the pathogen to
overcome host immunity and sustain infection [41, 42]. Therefore it was
necessary for us to examine in more detail the speciﬁc potential mech-
anisms for increased virulence of S. marcescens in LSMMG.
First we looked at several genes involved in ﬂagella formation,
membrane-bound proteins, and known virulence genes, and did not see
signiﬁcant upregulation in LSMMG compared to the control (Table 3).
We therefore looked at other genes linked to bacterial growth mecha-
nisms, and found that genes related to amino acid metabolism were
upregulated in LSMMG (Figure 1B). We found that several genes within
the asparagine synthesis pathway were overexpressed in LSMMG, but
speciﬁcally saw the largest overexpression, an almost 40-fold increase, in
the asparagine synthetase B (asnB gene). Asparagine synthetase B is an
enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of asparagine using aspartate, and
glutamine as a nitrogen source [43, 44]. The deletion of the asnB gene
leads to a slow-growth phenotype in the pathogen Bacillus subtilis, and in
most pathogens (including S. marcescens) is the main gene involved in
asparagine biosynthesis [45]. This gene has not been implicated previ-
ously in S. marcescens virulence, but has been shown to mediate virulence
and resistance to drugs in other bacterial pathogens [36, 37]. While this
gene and others in amino acid uptake pathways are important for growth
and division of the cell, they are also important mediators of
host-pathogen interactions [38]. While the host utilizes amino acid
metabolism to support defense responses against a pathogen, conversely,
the pathogen can modulate amino acid metabolism for its own advantage
[38]. Therefore, amino acid utilization and assimilation mechanisms can
be important mediators of infection at the host-pathogen interface, and
asparagine metabolism has been linked to virulence and resistance of
some pathogens to antibiotics [36, 37, 38].
In this study we characterize the underlying indicators for the
increased host mortality that we previously reported after infection with
microgravity-treated S. marcescens [11]. We show that S. marcescens
grown in LSMMG consume key amino acids glutamine and asparagine at
a faster rate than the control (Figure 1C, D), suggesting that the LSMMG
might be priming these pathogens to compete with responding host
immune cells for extracellular amino acids necessary for proliferation. In
fact, this is the method by which some pathogens are successful colo-
nizers of their hosts. The virulence of pathogen Francisella tularensis is
dependent on the pathogen's ability to replicate inside the host and
escape from macrophages [46]. Asparagine acquisition is critical in this
pathogen's success in replicating inside the host cell, where they use the
host as a substrate for asparagine and aspartate necessary to replicate
[46]. Similarly, S. marcescens has been shown to have the ability to sur-
vive and proliferate inside non-phagocytic host cells, suggesting that
there may be a similar mechanism of host-pathogen competition for
amino acids [47]. We see in our study that growth in LSMMG increases
the expression of asnB (Figure 1B), implying an increased consumption of
aspartate and glutamine to synthesize asparagine more efﬁciently, that
may allow these pathogens to out-compete host immune cells for amino
acids during infection. The presence of both aspartate and glutamine
Figure 4. Infection of ﬂies with S. marcescens shows maximum host mortality with LSMMG bacteria when supplemented with both aspartate and glutamine. Sample
was grown in A) Davis minimal media (DMM) either alone or with 10 mM aspartate and 10 mM glutamine, B) Davis minimal media supplemented with 10 mM
aspartate, C) Davis minimal media supplemented with 10 mM glutamine. Bacteria were grown for 24 h in the RWV, then ﬁxed in 20% glycerol for injections into
D. melanogaster hosts. Both glutamine and aspartate must be present together to elicit the maximum LSMMG-induced increase in host mortality as shown in Figure 4A.
(The full statistical results for all comparisons can be seen in Table 2.)
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
6

causes a signiﬁcant overexpression of asnB, even when they are the only
amino acids present in minimal media (Figure 3E). This suggests that
these two amino acid substrates, which are both required for asparagine
synthesis, are important for LSMMG-induced overexpression of asnB.
Therefore, we believe that the LSMMG-induced increase in pathogen
virulence may be mediated by the ability of S. marcescens to utilize
asparagine more efﬁciently within the host after infection, although
further studies are needed to evaluate how S. marcescens reared in
LSMMG are speciﬁcally interacting with the host's immune cells.
We also found evidence that there is an overexpression of some L-
asparaginase
subunits,
including
L-asparaginase
(Figure
3E
and
Figure 1B) when asnB is overexpressed in the presence of its substrates,
aspartate and glutamine. The homeostatic maintenance of the asparagine
pathway consists of the anabolic and catabolic processes catalyzed by
asnB and L-ap respectively which could result in the upregulation of both
enzymes with increased asparagine metabolism. In Salmonella typhimu-
rium infections, it has been shown that L-asparaginase suppresses T-cell
responses by suppressing T-cell blastogenesis, proliferation, and cytokine
production in the host, and that this effect could be attenuated by
treatment with L-asparagine [48]. This highlights the fact that asparagine
can be a key amino acid both for mammalian immune responses to
bacterial pathogens, and is also important for bacterial growth and
virulence properties. In this study, we provide evidence that the aspar-
agine pathway is a critical determinant of the LSMMG-dependent in-
crease in host mortality induced by S. marcescens.
While aspartate alone can increase in vitro growth of S. marcescens in
an LSMMG-speciﬁc manner (Figure 3D), the combination of both
aspartate and glutamine (substrates for asparagine synthesis) are
required to cause the maximal increase in host lethality during the
infection of D.melanogaster with LSMMG treated bacteria (Figure 4A).
Similarly, the presence of both aspartate and glutamine are required to
elicit the full induction of asnB gene expression which is not seen with
aspartate or glutamine addition alone (Figure 3E). Interestingly, these
results indicate that increased division rate of the pathogen during the
growth phase alone (Figure 3) is not sufﬁcient to recapitulate the full
extent of host mortality observed after infection with microgravity-
treated S. marcescens (Figure 4). Therefore, the microgravity dependent
increase in host mortality induced by S. marcescens, appears to be linked
speciﬁcally with asparagine pathway function under LSMMG conditions,
and cannot be fully accounted for simply by increasing bacterial growth
rate with the addition of amino acid substrates. To further characterize
the effect of the asparagine pathway, the direct suppression of the
expression of asnB through controlled genetic mechanisms was not
within the scope of this study. However, as mentioned above, we
demonstrated that the attenuation of the asparagine pathway, via the
absence of relevant amino acids from the growth media, suppresses the
overexpression of asnB in LSMMG (Figure 3E) and correlates with
increased host survival (Figure 4B,C). Additional studies that target asnB
gene with a knockdown will be conducted in future.
When we co-infect ﬂies with both LSMMG-reared S. marcescens and
exogenously-added puriﬁed L-asparaginase, we see a therapeutic effect,
and the ﬂies die at a signiﬁcantly slower rate than the LSMMG-reared
bacteria injected alone (Figure 2C). This is in line with our hypothesis
that growth in LSMMG is priming S. marcescens with the ability to
compete effectively with the host for asparagine utilization. The addition
of L-asparaginase would break down extracellular asparagine, thereby
diminishing the ability of the bacteria to out-compete the host's ability to
utilize asparagine for its cellular processes. Consistent with this, L-
asparaginase added to the growth medium causes suppression of
S. marcescens growth, but only in LSMMG and not in the RWV-Control
(Figure 2B). These results suggest that additional exogenous L-aspar-
aginase has a detrimental effect on the pathogen itself and causes it to
become less virulent in LSMMG, perhaps by reducing the amount of
available asparagine that otherwise would have enhanced the LSMMG-
treated microbe's ability to utilize this amino acid in the host's body. In
growth media without the presence of exogenous L-asparaginase, the L-
asparagine in the growth media is consumed at a signiﬁcantly faster rate
in LSMMG than in the RWV-Control (Figure 1C), and a similar effect is
seen with the consumption of glutamine (Figure 1D). In some pathogens,
mutants lacking the ability to synthesize glutamine or to acquire
Table 2. Results of the proportional hazards survival model for the minimal
media supplementation injections (Figure 4). ‘Ratio’ refers to the ratio of the
hazard rates corresponding to the conditions described by Level 1 and Level 2,
respectively. This value can be interpreted as a magnitude of differences in
survival between Level 1 and Level 2.
Level1
/Level2
Risk Ratio
Prob > Chisq
LSMMG DMM
1g DMM
1.2503237
0.4608
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
1g Asp þ Gln
2.4616875
0.0021*
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
1G Asp
4.485328
<.0001*
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
1g DMM
7.3218004
<.0001*
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
1G Gln
2.7200956
0.0010*
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
LSMMG Asp
1.9824812
0.0221*
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
LSMMG DMM
5.8559238
<.0001*
LSMMG Asp þ Gln
LSMMG Gln
2.2930899
0.0056*
LSMMG Asp
1G Asp
2.262482
0.0078*
LSMMG Asp
1g DMM
3.6932508
<.0001*
LSMMG Asp
1G Gln
1.3720662
0.2776
LSMMG Asp
LSMMG DMM
2.9538357
0.0005*
LSMMG Asp
LSMMG Gln
1.1566767
0.615
LSMMG Gln
1G Asp
1.9560193
0.0278*
LSMMG Gln
1g DMM
3.1929845
0.0003*
LSMMG Gln
1G Gln
1.1862141
0.5564
LSMMG Gln
LSMMG DMM
2.5537263
0.0022*
1g Asp þ Gln
1G Asp
3.0685957
0.0004*
1g Asp þ Gln
1g DMM
5.0091421
<.0001*
1g Asp þ Gln
1G Gln
1.8609283
0.0365*
1g Asp þ Gln
LSMMG Asp
1.3562962
0.2974
1g Asp þ Gln
LSMMG DMM
4.0062762
<.0001*
1g Asp þ Gln
LSMMG Gln
1.5687963
0.1245
1G Asp
1g DMM
1.6323891
0.1061
1G Asp
LSMMG DMM
1.3055732
0.377
1G Gln
1G Asp
1.6489597
0.0953
1G Gln
1g DMM
2.6917438
0.0015*
1G Gln
LSMMG DMM
2.1528375
0.0113*
Table 3. Expression values of candidate genes in S. marcescens for growth,
motility, and virulence as measured by qPCR. Expression values are reported as
fold change in LSMMG relative to RWV-Control and calculated using the ΔΔ Ct
method. Samples were grown in the RWV for 24 h, then ﬁxed in RNAlater for
extraction. Samples were run with three technical replicates per plate, and were
performed in three biological replicates. Values reported are the average across
all replicates. All averaged replicates reported are p < 0.01.
Gene Name
Fold Change
FlgG
2.09
secY
2.06
FliE
2.05
nudE
2.00
IpxD
2.04
tatB
2.08
hslU
2.31
rseA
0.88
groEL
1.21
dnaK
2.00
dinF
-0.5
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
7

glutamine from the host, show attenuated virulence, since this is an
important source of nitrogen assimilation during colonization of the
pathogen in the host [49, 50]. These studies further support the idea that
amino acids that are critical for several cellular processes, including
protein synthesis, can also be important for pathogen virulence.
To summarize the results of our study, we report that genes related to
asparagine biosynthesis were overexpressed after exposing S. marcescens
to LSMMG, and that the consumption rates of extracellular asparagine
and glutamine in rich media were higher in LSMMG than in the control
(Figure 1). In nutrient-limited media, these gene expression and viru-
lence patterns can be recapitulated by supplying only the precursors for
asparagine biosynthesis: glutamine and aspartate (Figures 3E and 4A).
The addition of aspartate causes a LSMMG-speciﬁc increase in growth of
S. marcescens but not a concomitant increase in asnB gene expression
(Figure 3D,E). Therefore, LSMMG-speciﬁc increase in expression of the
asnB gene is only seen in media that contains both aspartate and gluta-
mine, the precursors for asparagine synthesis (Figure 3E). Consistent
with this, the addition of both aspartate and glutamine in the media
during growth is also necessary for the greatest increase in host mortality
in LSMMG compared to the control (Figure 4A). Furthermore, the coin-
jection of exogenous asparaginase during the infection of ﬂy hosts with
LSMMG-reared S. marcescens, results in a therapeutic effect and the ﬂies
die more slowly than with injections of the LSMMG-treated bacteria
alone (Figure 2C).
The results of this study provide compelling evidence for the
involvement of the asparagine pathway in increasing S. marcescens'
effectiveness to kill its host in a microgravity-speciﬁc manner. This study
provides a novel mechanism by which microgravity might be affecting
S. marcescens virulence via modiﬁed nutrient utilization capabilities.
Importantly, we found that L-asparaginase could be used as a potential
therapeutic agent during infections with bacteria in LSMMG. An inter-
esting sequelae to this study would be to test the L-asparaginase as a
countermeasure where both the host and the pathogen are exposed to
microgravity during spaceﬂight. This study also furthers our need for
understanding how LSMMG may be a unique stressor on bacterial
pathogens, and emphasizes the importance of the use of ground-based
models in informing spaceﬂight research.
3.1. Limitations of the study
While this work provides evidence that LSMMG is priming the
pathogen to out-compete the host immune system by the efﬁcient utili-
zation of amino acids such as asparagine, we have not yet evaluated the
metabolomics of the host-pathogen interface after infection. That data
will be collected in a subsequent study as a follow-on to this body of work
where we have identiﬁed a novel mechanistic pathway that correlates
Serratia marcescens virulence induced by reduced gravity environments.
We were also constrained to using qPCR as the method for analyzing gene
expression in this study, although RNA-seq could provide a more global
assessment of gene expression changes. However, we have RNA-seq an-
alyses ongoing for S. marcescens samples from a recent spaceﬂight
mission. We anticipate that RNA-seq data will provide additional data to
query the LSMMG-treated bacterial samples for additional genetic
pathways that may be involved, since both spaceﬂight and LSMMG
treatment results in increased growth and host mortality induced by
S. marcescens. Lastly, while D. melanogaster is an excellent model for
characterizing host-pathogen interactions, a future goal would be to
conduct complementary studies in mammalian models in preparation for
testing
countermeasures
like
asparaginase
for
future
spaceﬂight
experiments.
3.2. Resource availability
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current
study are available from the corresponding author on request.
4. Methods
4.1. D. melanogaster ﬂy strains
Fly lines were maintained in a 12-hour light-dark cycle on cornmeal-
agar media (torula yeast, dextrose, cornmeal, agar, Tegosept, propionic
acid, ethanol) at ambient temperature (~24 C). Fly line used in this
study was obtained from the Bloomington Stock Center, w1118 (#3605).
4.2. Growth of S. marcescens Db11 in rotating wall vessel (RWV)
S. marcescens Db11 were taken from stock cultures frozen at -80 C in
Copan Cryovials and were grown in sterile 50 mL conical tubes at 37 C in
liquid LB media containing 100 μg/mL streptomycin for 24 h. Liquid
subcultures were then diluted down to A600 of 0.100 in LB media and
loaded into a sterile 10 mL rotating wall vessel (Synthecon). The RWV
simulates microgravity by rotating at a speed and orientation which
keeps cells suspended in liquid without bubbles and simulates the
weightlessness that cells experience during spaceﬂight [24] and this is
referred to as the LSMMG treatment. When using the RWV to induce
LSMMG, the vessel is rotated with an axis of rotation that is perpendic-
ular to the orientation of the gravity vector and the rotation offsets the
sedimental effects of gravity and keeps the cells in continuous suspension
(LSMMG). In contrast, in the control orientation (RWV-Control), the axis
of rotation is parallel to the gravity vector and does not offset the sedi-
mentation
induced
by
Earth's
gravitational
force.
Thus,
in
the
RWV-Control, the cells can settle at the bottom of the container and
experience Earth gravity (1g), thereby acting as a control for any po-
tential biological effects of the container vessel itself [19]. Air bubbles
were removed from the vessel and vessels were sealed. Pairs of RWV
were then placed in either vertical (simulated microgravity) or horizontal
(normal gravity, or RWV-Control) orientation at 37 C and rotated at 25
rpm (as in Nickerson et al. [19]). Samples were grown for 24 h to ensure
that stationary phase was reached.
4.3. Asparagine and glutamine quantiﬁcation
At 6 and 14 h of growth, 200 μl of sample was taken from the RWV
using a sterile 2 mL syringe, and the sample was used per manufacturer
protocol to estimate abundances of L-asparagine and L-glutamine. The
sample removed from the RWV was replaced with sterile PBS, and any air
bubbles were removed before resuming rotation. The entire sample
removal procedure took less than 5 min. For enzymatic tests, we used the
L-Asparagine/L-Glutamine/Ammonia Assay Kit (Megazyme) following
the manufacturer's recommendations and using asparagine or glutamine
(ﬁnal concentration 0.6 mM) as substrates. Enzymatic activities were
measured by following the disappearance of the NADPH from the buffer
along time as an indirect indication of asparagine deamination at 340 nm
using a microplate reader (VERSAmax microplate reader, Molecular
Devices). Experiments were performed in three independent replicates.
4.4. Growth of S. marcescens with L-asparaginase
Stocks of Db11 were prepared for growth in RWV as described above
in either vertical (simulated microgravity with axis of rotation being
perpendicular to the gravity vector) or horizontal (normal gravity RWV-
control orientation with the axis of rotation being parallel to the gravity
vector) orientations at 37 C and rotated at 25 rpm (as in Nickerson et al.
[19]). One hundred microliters of L-asparaginase (Millipore Sigma)
suspended in sterile water was added to the growth media for half of the
vessels, and the other half received only 100 μl of the sterile water.
Growth of the bacteria was estimated by absorbance at 600 nm and was
measured every 3 h. Samples were grown for 24 h total to ensure that
stationary phase was reached. The sample removed from the RWV for
quantiﬁcation was replaced with sterile PBS, and any air bubbles were
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
8

removed before resuming rotation. These experiments were run in three
independent replicates.
4.5. L-asparaginase treatment
S. marcescens in the stationary phase were preserved at -80 C in 10
mL of 20% glycerol. Concentrations of samples for injections were
determined by performing colony counts of Serratia in different con-
centrations of PBS on LB plates. The PBS source without added bacteria
was plated as a negative control for contamination. Based on these colony
counts, samples were then diluted to 4  105 CFU/mL in sterile PBS for
injections.
For infections and survival, the Nanoject II (Drummond Scientiﬁc)
was used with the 32 nL injection volume setting as described previously
by our laboratory [11]. Concentrations were adjusted so that each in-
jection was approximately 10 CFU/ﬂy. A total of 180 ﬂies were injected,
with 60 total ﬂies assigned to each bacterial treatment group. Control
bacteria, simulated microgravity-treated bacteria, or a glycerol sham
were then injected into the 30 anesthetized 2-3 day-old males and 30
females (post-eclosion) D. melanogaster in the ventral abdomen near the
seventh/eighth segment. One hour later, half of those ﬂies (15 per sex)
were injected with 32 nL L-asparaginase. After injections, ﬂies were kept
at 25 C on the same standard dextrose food that they were reared on,
and survival was monitored every hour for at least 24 h. These experi-
ments were repeated in three independent replicates.
4.6. Growth in Davis minimal media supplemented with amino acids
Bacteria were prepared using the protocol previously mentioned, but
Davis Minimal Media supplemented with 10 mM of aspartate, glutamine,
or a 50/50 mixture of aspartate and glutamine was used in place of LB
broth. To quantify growth, 20 μl of sample diluted in 180 μl of PBS was
read at an absorbance of A600 every 24 h for 72 h. To keep the volume of
the RWV consistent, 20 μl of sterile PBS was placed in each vessel to make
up for the volume lost during sampling. These experiments were repeated
in three independent replicates. S. marcescens in the stationary phase
were preserved at -80 C in 10 mL of 20% glycerol. Concentrations of
samples for injections were determined by performing colony counts of
Serratia in different concentrations of PBS on LB plates. The PBS source
without added bacteria were plated as a negative control for contami-
nation. Based on these colony counts, samples were then diluted to 4 
105 CFU/mL in sterile PBS for injections.
For infections and survival, the Nanoject II (Drummond Scientiﬁc)
was used with the 32 nL injection volume setting as described previously
by our laboratory [11]. Concentrations were adjusted so that each in-
jection was approximately 10 CFU/ﬂy. A total of 30 ﬂies (15 males and
15 females) were infected with each experimental sample, including 30
total ﬂies injected with a glycerol sham. These experiments were
repeated in three independent replicates.
4.7. Expression analysis of amino acid genes
Samples were diluted to 1  108 cells and pelleted, and RNA was
extracted from pelleted samples using the RNEasy® Mini Kit (Qiagen).
cDNA was generated using the RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit
(Thermo Scientiﬁc). Relative gene expression levels were quantiﬁed
using the 7500 Real Time PCR instrument from Applied Biosystems and
SYBR™Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). Primers were
designed with Primer-Blast, NCBI. Real-time cycler conditions were; 95
C for 15 min for initial activation step, and 40 cycles of 94 C for 15 s, 50
C for 30 s, and 72 C for 30 s for denaturation, annealing, and extension
respectively. Data were normalized to the reference gene recA. These
experiments were repeated in three independent replicates, including
RNA extraction from three independent growth trials and three qPCR
runs of each sample (9 total plates). Additionally, each plate (replicate)
contained 6 identical wells which were averaged to give a mean CT value
of a given gene, ensuring that any pipetting errors were minimized in the
data.
4.8. Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism 7.0 and JMP
Pro 15 (SAS). Graphs were made in GraphPad Prism 7.0 and Excel
(version 15.4). For survival analyses, a Cox Proportional Hazards model
was used. The Cox Proportional Hazards model allows for the compari-
son of survival between all groups when there are multiple risk factors or
treatments involved. The proportional hazards test generates a ‘risk ratio’
when comparing treatment curves, which can be interpreted in infection
experiments as a rate of death. For example, a risk ratio of 2.0 means that
one treatment kills the host twice as fast as the treatment it's being
compared to. For all growth measurements, a one-way ANOVA was used
in combination with a Tukey-Kramer posthoc analysis. For gene
expression, expression values are reported as fold change relative to the
Davis minimal media values, which were calculated in Excel using the
ΔΔ Ct method. For all statistical analyses, only results with a statistical
signiﬁcance <0.05 are reported, due to the magnitude of results tables.
Declarations
Author contribution statement
Rachel R Gilbert: Conceived and designed the experiments; Per-
formed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Wrote the
paper.
Nicole Tanenbaum: Performed the experiments; Analyzed and inter-
preted the data.
Sharmila Bhattacharya: Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contrib-
uted reagents, materials, analysis tools, or data; Wrote the paper.
Funding statement
This work was supported by NASA's Biological and Physical Sciences
Division (grant number NNX15AB42G), Ames Research Center Intra-
mural Research Funding, and the International Space Station Research
and Development Ofﬁce (to S.B.), and the NASA Postdoctoral Program
(to R.G.).
Data availability statement
Data will be made available on request.
Declaration of interests statement
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Additional information
No additional information is available for this paper.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of Nhung (Mindy)
Tran and Rachel Lo, who provided technical support for aspects of this
project. We also thank NASA's Biological and Physical Sciences (BPS)
Division for their support of SB while she served as the discipline scientist
for invertebrate biology at NASA Ames Research Center.
References
[1] A. Casadevall, L.A. Pirofski, Host-pathogen interactions: basic concepts of microbial
commensalism, colonization, infection, and disease, Infect. Immun. 68 (2000)
6511–6518.
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
9

[2] A.T. Borchers, C.L. Keen, M.E. Gershwin, Microgravity and immune responsiveness:
implications for space travel, Nutrition 18 (2002) 889–898.
[3] L.A. Mermel, Infection prevention and control during prolonged human space
travel, Clin. Infect. Dis. 56 (2013) 123–130.
[4] R. Tixador, et al., Preliminary results of cytos 2 experiment, Acta Astronaut. 12
(1985) 131–134.
[5] R. Tixador, et al., Behavior of bacteria and antibiotics under space conditions, Aviat
Space Environ. Med. 65 (1994) 551–556.
[6] L. Lapchine, et al., Antibiotic activity in space, Drugs Exp. Clin. Res. 12 (1986) 933–938.
[7] D.M. Klaus, H.N. Howard, Antibiotic efﬁcacy and microbial virulence during space
ﬂight, Trends Biotechnol. 24 (2006) 131–136.
[8] J.W. Wilson, et al., Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and
reveals a role for global regulator Hfq, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104 (2007)
16299–16304.
[9] J.W. Wilson, et al., Media ion composition controls regulatory and virulence
response of Salmonella in spaceﬂight, PLoS One 3 (2008), e3923.
[10] A. Crabbe, et al., Transcriptional and proteomic responses of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PAO1 to spaceﬂight conditions involve Hfq regulation and reveal a role
for oxygen, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77 (2011) 1221–1230.
[11] R. Gilbert, et al., Spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity conditions increase
virulence of Serratia marcescens in the Drosophila melanogaster infection model, npj
Microgravity 6 (2020) 1–9.
[12] L. Zea, et al., Phenotypic changes exhibited by E. coli cultured in space, Front.
Microbiol. 8 (2017) 1598.
[13] A. Khanna, M. Khanna, A. Aggarwal, Serratia marcescens- a rare opportunistic
nosocomial pathogen and measures to limit its spread in hospitalized patients,
J. Clin. Diagn. Res. 7 (2013) 243–246.
[14] D. Moradigaravand, C.J. Boinett, V. Martin, S.J. Peacock, J. Parkhill, Recent
independent emergence of multiple multidrug-resistant Serratia marcescens clones
within the United Kingdom and Ireland, Genome Res. 26 (2016) 1101–1109.
[15] J.D. Sleigh, Antibiotic resistance in Serratia marcescens, Br. Med. J. 287 (1983)
1651–1652.
[16] A. Iguchi, et al., Stress responses as determinants of antimicrobial resistance in
Gram-negative bacteria, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 6 (2014) 455–481.
[17] C.M. Ott, R.J. Bruce, D.L. Pierson, Microbial characterization of free ﬂoating
condensate aboard the mir space station, Microb. Ecol. 47 (2004) 133–136.
[18] B. Yi, A. Chouker, The immune system in space and space-like conditions: from the
human study perspective, in: The Immune System in Space: Are we prepared?,
2016, pp. 13–17.
[19] C.A. Nickerson, et al., Microgravity as a novel environmental signal affecting Salmonella
enterica serovar typhimurium virulence, Infect. Immun. 68 (2000) 3147–3152.
[20] J. Guo, et al., Use of genome sequencing to assess nucleotide structure variation of
Staphylococcus aureus strains cultured in spaceﬂight on Shenzhou-X, under
simulated microgravity and on the ground, Microbiol. Res. 170 (2015) 61–68.
[21] A. Soni, et al., Conservation of the low-shear modeled microgravity response in
enterobacteriaceae and analysis of the trp genes in this response, Open Microbiol. J.
8 (2014) 51–58.
[22] E.M. Martinez, M.C. Yoshida, T.L.T. Candelario, M. Hughes-Fulford, Spaceﬂight and
simulated microgravity cause a signiﬁcant reduction of key gene expression in early
T-cell activation, Am. J. Physiol. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 308 (2015) R480–R488.
[23] J. Barrila, et al., Organotypic 3D cell culture models: using the rotating wall vessel
to study host–pathogen interactions, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8 (2010) 791–801.
[24] T.G. Hammond, J.M. Hammond, Optimized suspension culture: the rotating-wall
vessel, Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol. 281 (2001).
[25] O. Marcu, et al., Innate immune responses of Drosophila melanogaster are altered by
spaceﬂight, PLoS One 6 (2011), e15361.
[26] S. Hateley, R. Hosamani, S.R. Bhardwaj, L. Pachter, S. Bhattacharya, Transcriptomic
response of Drosophila melanogaster pupae developed in hypergravity, Genomics
108 (2016) 158–167.
[27] M. Ikenaga, et al., Mutations induced in Drosophila during space ﬂight, Biol. Sci.
Space 11 (1997) 346–350.
[28] K. Taylor, et al., Toll mediated infection response is altered by gravity and
spaceﬂight in Drosophila, PLoS One 9 (2014), e86485.
[29] B. Lemaitre, J. Hoffmann, The host defense of Drosophila melanogaster, Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 25 (2007) 697–743.
[30] N. Buchon, N. Silverman, S. Cherry, Immunity in Drosophila melanogaster — from
microbial recognition to whole-organism physiology, Nat. Rev. Immunol. (2014)
796–810.
[31] R. Medzhitov, P. Preston-Hurlburt, C.A. Janeway, A human homologue of the
Drosophila Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity, Nature 388 (1997)
394–397.
[32] J.A. Hoffmann, The immune response of Drosophila, Nature 426 (2003) 33–38.
[33] L.T. Reiter, L. Potocki, S. Chien, M. Gribskov, E. Bier, A systematic analysis of
human disease-associated gene sequences in Drosophila melanogaster, Genome Res.
11 (2001) 1114–1125.
[34] I.V. Ogneva, et al., The development of Drosophila melanogaster under different
duration space ﬂight and subsequent adaptation to Earth gravity, PLoS One 11
(2016), e0166885.
[35] R. Hosamani, R. Leib, S.R. Bhardwaj, C.M. Adams, S. Bhattacharya, Elucidating the
“gravome”: quantitative proteomic proﬁling of the response to chronic hypergravity
in Drosophila, J. Proteome Res. 15 (2016) 4165–4175.
[36] H. Ren, J. Liu, AsnB is involved in natural resistance of Mycobacterium smegmatis to
multiple drugs, Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50 (2006) 250–255.
[37] G. Qian, et al., AsnB, regulated by diffusible signal factor and global regulator Clp, is
involved in aspartate metabolism, resistance to oxidative stress and virulence in
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicola, Mol. Plant Pathol. 14 (2013) 145–157.
[38] W. Ren, et al., Amino acids as mediators of metabolic cross talk between host and
pathogen, Front. Immunol. 9 (2018) 319.
[39] P.A. McLaughlin, et al., Contribution of asparagine catabolism to Salmonella
virulence, Infect. Immun. 85 (2017).
[40] A. Casadevall, The pathogenic potential of a microbe, mSphere 2 (2017).
[41] E.T. Granato, F. Harrison, R. Kümmerli, A. Ross-Gillespie, Do bacterial ‘virulence
factors’ always increase virulence? A meta-analysis of pyoverdine production in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a test case, Front. Microbiol. 7 (2016) 1952.
[42] Y. Hu, F. Movahedzadeh, N.G. Stoker, A.R.M. Coates, Deletion of the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis α-crystallin-like hspX gene causes increased bacterial growth in vivo,
Infect. Immun. 74 (2006) 861–868.
[43] A. Sugiyama, H. Kato, T. Nishioka, J. Oda, Overexpression and puriﬁcation of
asparagine synthetase from Escherichia coli, Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 56 (1992)
376–379.
[44] R. Manhas, et al., Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of a novel bacterial
type asparagine synthetase A: a trna synthetase paralog from leishmania donovani,
J. Biol. Chem. 289 (2014) 12096–12108.
[45] K.I. Yoshida, Y. Fujita, S.D. Ehrlich, Three asparagine synthetase genes of Bacillus
subtilis, J. Bacteriol. 181 (1999) 6081–6091.
[46] G. Gesbert, et al., Asparagine assimilation is critical for intracellular replication and
dissemination of Francisella, Cell Microbiol. 16 (2014) 434–449.
[47] G.V. Fedrigo, E.M. Campoy, G. Di Venanzio, M.I. Colombo, E. García Vescovi,
Serratia marcescens is able to survive and proliferate in autophagic-like vacuoles
inside non-phagocytic cells, PLoS One 6 (2011), e24054.
[48] A.L. Kullas, et al., L-asparaginase II produced by salmonella typhimurium
inhibits t cell responses and mediates virulence, Cell Host Microbe 12 (2012)
791–798.
[49] K.E. Klose, J.J. Mekalanos, Simultaneous prevention of glutamine synthesis and
high-afﬁnity transport attenuates Salmonella typhimurium virulence, Infect. Immun.
65 (1997) 587–596.
[50] A. Gouzy, et al., Mycobacterium tuberculosis exploits asparagine to assimilate
nitrogen and resist acid stress during infection, PLoS Pathog. 10 (2014).
R. Gilbert et al.
Heliyon 8 (2022) e09379
10
