Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Astronaut omics and the impact of space on
the human body at scale
Lindsay A. Rutter1,2,21,22, Henry Cope
3,22, Matthew J. MacKay4,5,6,22,
Raúl Herranz
7, Saswati Das8, Sergey A. Ponomarev
9, Sylvain V. Costes
10,
Amber M. Paul11, Richard Barker12, Deanne M. Taylor
13,14,
Daniela Bezdan
15,16,17, Nathaniel J. Szewczyk
3,18, Masafumi Muratani
1,2,
Christopher E. Mason
4,5,6,19
& Stefania Giacomello
20
Future multi-year crewed planetary missions will motivate advances in aero-
space nutrition and telehealth. On Earth, the Human Cell Atlas project aims to
spatially map all cell types in the human body. Here, we propose that a parallel
Human Cell Space Atlas could serve as an openly available, global resource for
space life science research. As humanity becomes increasingly spacefaring,
high-resolution omics on orbit could permit an advent of precision spaceﬂight
healthcare. Alongside the scientiﬁc potential, we consider the complex ethical,
cultural, and legal challenges intrinsic to the human space omics discipline,
and how philosophical frameworks may beneﬁt from international
perspectives.
Humanity may be on the brink of establishing a new era of inter-
planetary space exploration that would witness crewed missions
beyond low-Earth orbit (LEO) and a growing commercial spaceﬂight
sector that would prompt a wider health range of individuals entering
space compared to the selective cohorts of distinctively ﬁt profes-
sional astronauts from previous generations. Numerous space orga-
nizations across the globe openly aspire toward landing humans on
Mars in the coming decades, underscoring an overall international
interest in what may be the next stage of human space exploration.
Prominent examples include the SpaceX Mars program striving to
initiate the ﬁrst crewed Mars spaceﬂights in the late 2020s; the state-
owned China Academy of Launch Vehicle Technology announcing the
country’s goals to place humans on Mars in 2033; NASA (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, the United States space
agency) issuing the Authorization Act of 2017, which declares objec-
tives to send humanity to Mars in the early 2030s; Roscosmos
Received: 12 February 2023
Accepted: 22 March 2024
Check for updates
1Transborder Medical Research Center, University of Tsukuba, 305-8575 Tsukuba, Japan. 2Department of Genome Biology, Institute of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, 305-8575 Tsukuba, Japan. 3School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Derby DE22 3DT, UK. 4Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill
Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 5The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA. 6The WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 7Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas “Margarita Salas” (CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9, Madrid 28040, Spain. 8Department of Biochemistry, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of
Medical Sciences & Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi 110001, India. 9Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Institute for the Biomedical
Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, 123007 Moscow, Russia. 10Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA.
11Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Department of Human Factors and Behavioral Neurobiology, Daytona Beach, FL 32114, USA. 12Department of Botany,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. 13Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 14Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 15Institute of
Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany. 16NGS Competence Center Tübingen (NCCT), University of
Tübingen, Tübingen 72076, Germany. 17yuri GmbH, Meckenbeuren 88074, Germany. 18Ohio Musculoskeletal and Neurological Institute (OMNI), Heritage
College of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA. 19The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New
York, NY 10065, USA. 20SciLifeLab, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 17165, Sweden. 21Present address: School of Chemistry, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK. 22These authors contributed equally: Lindsay A. Rutter, Henry Cope, Matthew J. MacKay.
e-mail: chm2042@med.cornell.edu; stefania.giacomello@scilifelab.se
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

(the Russian space agency) publishing aims to send humans to Mars in
the early 2040s; and the United Arab Emirates publishing the Mars 2117
Project, which outlines a one-hundred-year plan to construct habitable
communities for humans on Mars. Thus, there is a motive for scientists
across the world to study how the human body responds to spaceﬂight
and to develop countermeasures that improve the health and safety of
crewed interplanetary missions.
Since the inception of human spaceﬂight, the duration that
astronauts spend in space each mission has increased over time
(Fig. 1A). Despite this, to date, only eleven individuals have resided in
space for more than 300 consecutive days. Pioneering crewed mis-
sions to Mars would see humans embarking through space for even
longer consecutive periods of time and in radiation environments for
which there is limited knowledge about the impact on human phy-
siology, warranting improvements in the autonomous space telehealth
ﬁeld. The risk of an emergency medical occurrence during space
missions has previously been estimated at approximately 0.06 per
person-year, which roughly equates to one event every 2.4 years for a
crew of seven1. Multiyear planetary missions would prevent resupply
and medical evacuation options and hence would require fully
autonomous telehealth and triage protocols.
Various applications of artiﬁcial intelligence and molecular omics
could likely advance the spaceﬂight telehealth ﬁeld. Omics technolo-
gies allow for the quantiﬁcation of large pools of biomolecules that
inﬂuence the integrity and function of biology. Exploratory and
untargeted omics techniques can measure analytes that are not pre-
determined. These studies can identify patterns of variance, which can
generate new hypotheses. Additionally, integrating omics with meta-
data, including environmental and phenotypic measures, enhances the
ability to establish robust links between environmental inﬂuences,
omic variations, and phenotypic outcomes2. The NASA Twins Study
integrated various omics platforms, including transcriptomics, epige-
nomics, metabolomics, and metagenomics, and highlighted omics as a
potential biomedical research platform that may one day translate into
the development of precision spaceﬂight healthcare3. The ambitious
project discovered more than 8600 differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between an astronaut who resided for almost one year on the
International Space Station (ISS) and their identical twin who resided
on Earth; it is possible that any permutation of the DEG list could
uncover biochemical pathways that hold keys to the development of
therapeutic supplements and lifestyle recommendations that better
protect health in space3,4. In this paper, we will consider how the dawn
of diversiﬁed human exploration of deeper space may beneﬁt from
sophisticated advances in spaceﬂight nutrition and health that may be
met in part with the addition of routine standardized omics.
Space omics efforts are now underway in multiple regions. In
Japan, the “Living in Space” Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research
(KAKENHI) program uncovers biological responses to the space
environment at various levels, ranging from environmental micro-
biomes to stress responses in humans, using omics technologies. In
Europe, the Space Omics Topical Team (TT) supports and generates
omics approaches to space biology5, and there are visible efforts to
promote further development of space omics research among ESA and
ESA state members6. In the United States, examples of space omics-
related campaigns include the Precision Health Initiative and Systems
Biology Translational Project through the NASA Human Research
Program (HRP) and the Complement of Integrated Protocols for
Human Exploration Research (CIPHER) project (“Human Research
Program Update”, WH Paloski, Committee on Biological and Physical
Sciences in Space (CBPSS) Virtual Fall Committee Meeting). The NASA
GeneLab initiative provides an open access, collaborative analysis
platform for space omics data collected across the world and unites
international efforts through analysis working groups7. Canada oper-
ates terrestrial platforms to analyze human omics linked with biome-
dical data8, and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) has announced
plans for national space omics research, in addition to already parti-
cipating in international space omics projects. China and Russia are
also publishing human space omics research9,10.
Humans in spaceﬂight historically represented nations like the
United Socialist Soviet Republic and the United States to a large degree
(Fig. 1B). After the ﬁrst couple of decades of human spaceﬂight, nations
like Canada, China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and Russia have also
been represented to a moderate degree (Fig. 1B). Individuals who have
entered space now represent, even if in smaller numbers, more than
thirty other nations: Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
Egypt, Hungary, India, Iran, Israel, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mexico,
Mongolia, Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saudi
Arabia, Slovakia, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzer-
land, Syria, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, and
Vietnam.
The Artemis program plans to soon reestablish a human presence
on the Moon, for the ﬁrst time in ﬁve decades, and construct a per-
manent lunar base to facilitate the future of human missions to Mars.
Led by NASA and partner agencies JAXA, ESA, and CSA, the Artemis
program includes signatories from about thirty countries and terri-
tories, reﬂecting on the theme of a more global human presence in
space. Indeed, crewed missions to Mars would motivate philosophical
thinking about humanity’s place in the universe, common to all
humans. Many people believe such missions will only be enabled by
worldwide collaboration due to the involvement of multiple countries
and international organizations, the implications for many people
across Earth, the sheer engineering demands, and the increasing global
representation of space explorers11. Upcoming planetary missions will
likely be multinational efforts, underscoring the need for global col-
laboration in regard to the science, culture, and ethics behind space
exploration. A new age of human space omics may likewise require
international input due to both the various cultural aspects and the
added technological, ethical, and philosophical complexities of
working with human subjects.
International Standards for Space Omics Processing (ISSOP)
represents an international consortium of space omics scientists who
formed after recognizing the need for standard guidelines in the
emerging spaceﬂight omics discipline. ISSOP includes scientists with
expertise across the full range of omics approaches who receive
funding from academia, industry, and government agencies across a
wide array of regions, including Japan, India, the Middle East, Canada,
Europe, Russia, and the United States. By promoting communication
exchange in the space omics discipline, ISSOP may be uniquely posi-
tioned to support the development of an informed framework early on
that can help maximize scientiﬁc discovery and minimize ethical pro-
blems for an upcoming era of human space omics.
In this paper, we consider how a future of precision space
healthcare could improve the safety of human health during long-term
spaceﬂight. We then discuss how careful standardization of space
omics data is one component that may help implement this goal. To
this end, we propose the development of a human cell atlas under
spaceﬂight environmental conditions that could assist as an openly
available, global resource for foundational space life science research.
We then consider the complex ethical, cultural, and legal challenges
intrinsic to the general discipline of human space omics, and how
philosophical frameworks would likely need to be established with
perspectives from international ethicists.
Precision healthcare in space
In the coming years, the spaceﬂight ﬁeld will likely observe diversiﬁ-
cation of the ﬂying population, extended mission durations, and
exposure to harsher radiation beyond LEO. These factors motivate an
upgraded space healthcare model where nutritional, supplemental,
and
pharmaceutical
decisions
could
be
tailored
to
multiple
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
2

Fig. 1 | Space Missions. A Violin plots showing the average time a given astronaut
spends in space per mission (calculated as total time in space divided by number of
missions) compared to the decade the astronaut ﬁrst went into space. Astronauts
are colored by the number of missions they have been on, and shapes represent
astronaut sex (females are triangles and males are circles). The average time spent
in space ranged from minutes to one month in the 1960s, and from one day to
under six months in the 1970s. In the 1980s through 2000s, the majority of
astronauts spent an average of between one week and one month in space per
mission, but many astronauts spent more than three months in space. Subse-
quently, in the 2010s, the majority of astronauts spent an average of over three
months in space per mission, whereas in the early 2020 s, there was the widest
distribution of average time in space, ranging from ten minutes to six months.
B The number of astronauts who have been in space by nationality. Bar plot shows
the number of astronauts by the year of their ﬁrst mission whereas the pie chart
shows the percentage of each nation’s contribution. Nations with only one astro-
naut to ever go to space are colored green (4%), nations with only between two and
ﬁve astronauts to go to space are colored lime green (3%), and astronauts with
multiple nationalities are colored yellow (1%). Data was scraped from super-
cluster.com on September 20th, 2021. Only astronauts who spent time in space and
crossed the Kármán line are displayed.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
3

characteristics12,13. On Earth, there are already applications of precision
health, where healthcare is informed based on omics, environmental,
and lifestyle factors14. It seems probable that as connections between
omics and spaceﬂight health ailments are slowly elucidated, similar
approaches could be implemented in space. The purpose of custo-
mizing spaceﬂight healthcare would not be to reduce spaceﬂight
participation, but to promote the health of increasingly diverse parti-
cipation that better reﬂects the sustained presence of the full inclusive
range of humanity in space one day13.
Countermeasure protocols for space missions can consist of
evidence-based nutritional supplements, exercise regimes, stress-
relieving techniques, and pharmacological interventions15. Moving
forward, crew proﬁles could potentially improve medical risk assess-
ment and countermeasures; optimize medical and nutritional pay-
loads; increase crew safety and efﬁciency; and maximize the likelihood
of mission success. In the next section, we will explore examples of
how astronaut health and performance can be impacted by omic dif-
ferences related to the metabolism of drugs, micronutrients, and
macronutrients. We focus on metabolism because changes in mito-
chondria, the key hub of metabolism, are a fundamental biological
feature of spaceﬂight16.
We note that the provocative nature of the spaceﬂight environ-
ment may induce a large number of physiological and molecular
changes on rapid time scales that may not necessarily be of health-
related importance. As a result, scientists must cautiously avoid
overassociating spaceﬂight omics changes with clinical meanings.
Indeed, most human gene association studies on Earth are associative
with many genome-wide association studies (GWAS) providing initial
results that failed to hold up upon further testing. The risk of over-
interpretation is particularly relevant in the ﬁeld of human space omics
given the small sample sizes and the small number of studies3; the
difﬁculty of securing suitable ground controls, both in omics and
environment3,17; and the long number of years required to replicate
ﬁndings. These problems are further ampliﬁed when studying the
long-term effects of spaceﬂight outside of LEO. We emphasize that the
following section mostly presents early evidence and even contra-
dictions due to the current limitations of the human space omics ﬁeld,
and that much more work would be needed in the coming decades to
assess
the
validity
of
the
below
preliminary
ﬁndings
and
interpretations.
Drug metabolism in space
Medical kits onboard the ISS contain pharmaceuticals to cover various
medical events and emergencies, including injuries, illnesses, infec-
tions, sleep disruptions, motion sickness, and cognitive and behavioral
health conditions18. Documentation of medication usage has not been
consistent, but studies suggest about 94% of crew members used
medications at least once during space shuttle missions19. Despite the
common use of medications to manage health concerns on orbit, few
studies have explored how to reﬁne pharmaceutical applications in the
unique environment of space. Preliminary evidence suggests that
spaceﬂight may introduce impurity products, alter the physical
appearance, and quicken the degradation of certain drugs before their
expiration dates20,21. Although these investigations have been severely
limited without adequate ground controls, they have underlined the
need to verify if any spaceﬂight factors may affect pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic parameters that determine the pharmaceutical
safety and efﬁcacy, and the mechanisms responsible for these
effects22,23. These factors might include the space environment itself
(such as chronic low-dose radiation) and/or confounding extraneous
factors (such as temperature, humidity, and dosage repackaging
commonly used to meet the limited volume constraints on space
vehicles)18,22,24.
Thorough metadata tabulation could eventually help unravel not
only how to preserve drugs in space, but also how to better understand
precision responses to such drugs. A recent pharmacogenetics study
by the ESA demonstrated that allelic variation may inﬂuence the safety
and effectiveness of how individual crew members metabolize drugs
on the ISS. Researchers examined the 78 standard drugs permanently
available on the ISS and found that the metabolism of 24 of them was
signiﬁcantly affected by individual variants in genetic polymorphism
enzymes25. This discovery suggested that almost one-third of drugs on
the ISS may warrant personal dose adjustments or alternative thera-
pies for crew memberswho have allelicpredispositions that can render
them anywhere from poor metabolizers (with decreased drug clear-
ance, increased plasma drug levels, and potential adverse drug
response) to ultra-rapid metabolizers (with increased drug clearance,
decreased
plasma
drug
levels,
and
potential
ineffective
drug
response). Populations throughout the world can have different fre-
quencies
of
genetic
polymorphism
enzymes
that
affect
drug
metabolisms26; thus, pharmacogenetic screening of consenting astro-
nauts
from
diverse
backgrounds
could
better
ensure
equal
representation27.
Personal astronaut drug-metabolism proﬁles could be generated
based on the two reaction phases of drug biotransformation. The ﬁrst
drug biotransformation reaction produces a more water-soluble and
less active metabolite usually through the hydroxylating enzyme
superfamily known as Cytochrome P450 (CYP450). This enzyme
superfamily is believed to account for 75% of total drug metabolism28.
Indeed, CYPs have recently been suggested to be altered in ﬂight due
to alterations in insulin and estrogen signaling29. Several CYP450 genes
are highly polymorphic, producing enzyme variants that cause varia-
bility in drug-metabolizing effects between groups. During mission
planning, CYP450 genetic variant proﬁles for consenting astronauts
could be generated and cross-referenced with mission drug lists to
prevent scenarios in which crew members would otherwise metabolize
drugs in harmful or inefﬁcient ways13. The second drug bio-
transformation is usually a conjugation reaction wherein a small
molecule binds to the drug metabolite and increases its solubility for
excretion. For this situation, consenting astronauts could assess their
pre-mission status of all nutrient cofactors and conjugation agents
(such as glutathione, glycine, cysteine, arginine, and taurine) to inform
their optimum conditions13.
One concrete example of how CYP allelic variants could inform
treatments during space exploration relates to acute radiation sickness
(ARS)30. ARS is an accepted risk on orbit, and common medications to
treat its primary symptoms of nausea and vomiting include ondanse-
tron and granisetron, which are both metabolized differently in the
liver based on individual CYP genetic polymorphisms. Speciﬁcally, the
CYP2D6 enzyme metabolizes ondansetron, and, hence, groups who
are ultra-rapid metabolizers of the CYP2D6 pathway have a higher risk
of still vomiting within one day of radiotherapy with ondansetron31.
These groups may beneﬁt from treating ARS with granisetron, which is
instead metabolized by the CYP3A enzyme31. Another example of how
CYP allelic variants could inform spaceﬂight therapies based on per-
sonal predispositions relates to sleep drugs, which are commonly used
by crew. In fact, 78% of shuttle crew reported taking zolpidem and
zaleplon, powerful sleep pills, for more than half of the nights of their
missions32. CYP3A polymorphisms are known to affect zolpidem
metabolism33, but not zaleplon metabolism25, and astronauts could use
this knowledge to more safely tailor their sleep-related treatments.
It may also be meaningful to investigate optimal doses of medi-
cations that are more tailored to the demanding lifestyles of astro-
nauts. For example, unlike many individuals on Earth, astronauts on
the ISS are occasionally awakened by alarmsduring scheduled sleeping
shifts in order to perform emergency tasks that require effective
cognitive and psychomotor capabilities34. A study at NASA Johnson
Space Center found that subjects who consumed a higher dose of
zolpidem before sleep experienced signiﬁcantly reduced cognitive
and
psychomotor
performance
during
emergency
awakenings;
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
4

however, they found no similar impairments in subjects who con-
sumed the lower dose of zolpidem, the dose of zaleplon, or the pla-
cebo before sleep onset34. Hence, even though the approved doses of
zolpidem and zaleplon may be ﬁt for most terrestrial applications, the
unique duties during spaceﬂight may warrant adjusted recommended
dosages of these, and possibly other, approved medications.
Even the metabolism of medications may be altered in spaceﬂight
compared to on Earth. The kidneys, which play a major role in drug
excretion, may reduce urine output during weightlessness35. The liver,
which is the main organ that metabolizes drugs and xenobiotics, may
also behave differently between terrestrial and spaceﬂight conditions,
although results have been conﬂicting: While some studies have
reported an
increase
in
hepatic
blood
ﬂow
and
size
during
spaceﬂight36, other studies have suggested a decrease in hepatic
metabolism in space, which may roughly correspond to a decrease in
hepatic blood ﬂow due to the hypovolemia that occurs on orbit37. Clear
elucidation of potential differences between drug metabolism in ter-
restrial versus orbital conditions will require further investigation, and
any reliable ﬁndings could eventually be integrated for improved
aerospace healthcare recommendations27.
Micronutrient metabolism in space
Recent studies are elucidating tentative relationships between omics
and micronutrient intake that may link to adverse health events in
space. One key example of this is one-carbon metabolism, which
involves the transfer of methyl groups from donors (such as folate,
B12, choline, and betaine). We note that many of the donors are
essential inputs that must be obtained from the diet. The enzymes that
regulate one-carbon metabolism are produced from highly poly-
morphic methyltransferase genes; any possible ramiﬁcations for
human spaceﬂight are only recently unfolding13.
As an example, spaceﬂight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome
(SANS) is a unique and distinctive clinical manifestation. It includes
optic disk edema (swelling), choroidal folds, and focal areas of
ischemic retina (cotton wool spots). This disease is believed to present
in over 20% of astronauts both during and after short and long dura-
tion spaceﬂight38. With no known terrestrial analogue, evidence-based
countermeasures are only recently emerging; these include lower
body negative pressure and nutritional supplementation39, the latter of
which could be further reﬁned through omics studies. Indeed, one
research group examined 49 astronauts and discovered that common
variations in one-carbon metabolism genes, combined with lower
levels of vitamins B2, B6, and B9, appeared to be associated with
SANS40,41.
In addition to poor neuro-ocular health, disordered one-carbon
metabolism may play a role in bone fragility (with increased osteoclast
activation and decreased osteoblast activity)13, hypertension (with
increased intraocular pressure)42, and chromosome instability (with
concurring folate deﬁciency increasing defective DNA repair)43. It is
indicative that this single metabolic property may have wide-ranging
impacts on some of the more perplexing health complications known
to occur during spaceﬂight13. For these reasons, one-carbon metabo-
lism is an example candidate for deeper research into a future preci-
sion space medicine approach.
There is likewise preliminary evidence that prolonged radiation
exposure may interact with genetic polymorphisms that alter micro-
nutrient metabolism, predisposing to disease in space. For example,
there is precursory evidence suggesting that the space environment
partially contributes to altered iron metabolism in astronauts44. Iron
overload is believed to occur more often in individuals with allelic
variants for hemochromatosis (HFE)45. Simultaneously, urinary mag-
nesium (Mg) levels are reported to decrease during space missions,
with a slight majority of post-spaceﬂight astronauts presenting with
levels below minimum clinical guidelines46. Taken together, these
provisional observations suggest that astronauts with HFE allelic
variants maydevelop unusually high levels of iron when exposed to the
space environment, which may induce oxidative stress and unstable
DNA47. Given that Mg repairs DNA damage48, further research may be
justiﬁed to examine whether convergent Mg deﬁciencies could com-
plete a dangerous aggregation of risk events in a subset of astronauts
who are susceptible to this array of environment, omics, and dietary
intake parameters13. DNA stability is a leading human safety concern in
space and hence it seems meaningful to investigate whether con-
senting individuals can beneﬁt from optimizing any essential dietary
inputs with relevance to DNA repair before, during, and after space-
ﬂight based on precision risk proﬁles.
The supplementation of Vitamin D, another important micro-
nutrient, is regularly integrated into spaceﬂight nutrition programs49.
While Vitamin D is well-known for its inﬂuence on bone production, it
impacts several more biological processes, including immune system
modulation. Its effect on immunity seems to be mediated by the
Vitamin D receptor (VDR), expressed by antigen-presenting cells and
activated T cells50. Conversely, Vitamin D and VDR are necessary to
maintain a healthy number of regulatory T cells51. Allelic variants of the
VDR gene appear to be associated with better response to Vitamin D
supplementation52,
and
allelic
variants
of
genes
(such
as
7-Dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7), a gene related to sterol
metabolism) are believed to be related to improved Vitamin D meta-
bolism and insulin resistance53. Therefore, poor Vitamin D status and
metabolism of individuals during space missions, which already have
inherent stressful elements, might negatively affect the immune sys-
tems of astronauts, and this could potentially be mitigated through
precision omics proﬁles.
Macronutrient metabolism in space
Differences in macronutrient consumption needs have been linked to
variants in genes, such as the Retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB) gene,
the DNA damage-regulated autophagy modulator 1 (DRAM1) gene, and
the Fat mass and obesity-associated (FTO) gene54,55. Altogether, these
variants appear to be associated with body composition, fat distribu-
tion, and obesity risk in relation to carbohydrate, lipid, and protein
intake54,55. Initial studies have suggested that endocrine changes linked
to spaceﬂight modify metabolism and strengthen its association with
alterations in astronaut body composition and nutritional intake
needs56. It may be possible that long-duration space voyages could
exacerbate dietary deﬁcits. The nutritional condition of astronauts
appears to be affected by metabolic stress, changing gut ﬂora, altered
feeding behavior, vitamin insufﬁciency, and electrolyte imbalance57.
Maintaining energy balance in space missions will likely be critical for
maintaining body fat muscle homeostasis58.
These early ﬁndings imply a possibility that prolonged space
exposure and dietary deﬁcits may interact with genetic polymorph-
isms in a subset of astronauts to promote unusual pathologies that
could be prevented by better nutritional information and health plans
based on thorough research in the spaceﬂight omics discipline. It may
hence be valuable to properly investigate and characterize any rela-
tionships between micronutrients, macronutrients, pharmaceuticals,
omics, and various spaceﬂight environmental factors. These relation-
ships are complex and underline the critical usefulness for rigorous
standardization of space omics data and metadata so that meta-
analyses may one day disentangle more conﬁdently which factors are
linked to preventable diseases at both the group and individual levels
during spaceﬂight.
Standardized space omics collection
Standardization of space omics data and metadata would be an
important component of a successful human space omics discipline.
JAXA is currently conducting human liquid biopsy studies on the ISS.
The main purpose of the studies is to investigate how the space
environment affects humans at the tissue level. Besides fat and skin
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
5

samples, which can be risky, whole-body solid tissue biopsies cannot
typically be conducted in humans in space. As a result, the project
proposes to perform minimally invasive liquid biopsies in astronauts.
Liquid biopsies can detect cell-free components (microRNA, RNA,
DNA, and extracellular vesicles) in the blood and scientists can esti-
mate which tissues the cell components are derived from, allowing for
full-body monitoring of omics responses. While solid biopsies only
reﬂect a single time point of a single site on a single tissue, liquid
biopsies can allow for a less invasive assessment of extracellular DNA
and RNA in the plasma, which can represent molecular responses of
the internal tissues in the body and can be obtained at repeated
timepoints. The projectproposes to collectastronaut blood samples at
multiple time points before, during, and after living on the ISS. Murine
and human plasma samples may be processed using the same pro-
cessing protocol, thereby allowing for direct comparison of human
and veterinary patients in a minimally invasive fashion for both spe-
cies. These unique data collections are expected to enable cross-
species integrative data analysis of space environment effects on
mammals in a manner that is less technically and ethically complex
than previous methods.
Moving forward, the majority of sampling on astronauts would
likely consist of liquid biopsy approaches and other non-invasive
and minimally invasive procedures. Traditional tissue biopsies carry
a risk of infection and localized pain which could compromise
astronaut health and performance in physical tasks such as space-
walks. Furthermore, less invasive sampling methods are often quick
to perform and do not require signiﬁcant recovery periods between
samples, which can allow for more frequent sampling and thus
greater temporal resolution of omic changes throughout missions.
The feasibility of orbital sampling and readout can be explored for
various biological sources, such as saliva, sweat, tears, urine, and
nasal discharge, some of which have been reviewed in the context of
human spaceﬂight elsewhere59. An increase in capabilities for
inﬂight omic processing and readout could also enable inﬂight
interventions to maintain health, such as nutritional supplements
based on gene regulatory changes related to metabolism of speciﬁc
vitamins.
New metadata normalization is another example of a rising stan-
dardization challenge that comes with the arrival of human space
omics projects. Some key metadata parameters that should be col-
lected from humans include environment, diet, nutrition, psychosocial
dynamics,
lifestyle,
medical
history,
anthropometrics,
and
phenotypes13. Many of these metadata parameters have not been
necessarily collected in space and hence have no standardization
methods. For instance, wearable technology could be implemented to
provide metadata of astronaut health, similar to ﬁtness trackers that
have been successfully used on Earth to measure various medical
parameters, including increased insulin resistance, which has also been
observed in spaceﬂight60,61. At the same time, metadata can be misused
to identify individual astronauts, an ethical problem that, unlike in
model organism studies, has to be addressed. With a mission to con-
tinuously improve recommended metadata normalization protocols
for space omics data, ISSOP may help spark discussions needed to
resolve some of these challenges.
In addition to best efforts to standardize space omics studies62,
increased resolution may help interpret allelic variants associated with
disease risks by more precisely pinpointing cell types and states
involved in biology. Achieving this goal relates back to our project
exploring an example set of alleles that are putatively linked to pro-
tective mechanisms, and their implications for therapeutic compound
discovery
and
improved
spaceﬂight
nutrition
and
lifestyle
recommendations63. As described next, extending standardized
approaches toward space omics data that is higher in resolution could
enable the generation of cell space atlases, which could further push
forward a developing ﬁeld of precision space healthcare.
Human cell space atlas
To date, bulk transcriptomic technologies, such as RNA-sequencing
(RNA-seq) and microarrays, have mostly been used to understand how
spaceﬂight impacts physiology. These approaches have characterized
physiology at the tissue level, composed of billions of diverse cells,
rather than at the individual cell level. However, to obtain a thorough
understanding of the complex dynamics that spaceﬂight causes in
humans, there is a need to increase the analysis resolution level.
In the Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA), researchers recently
collected high-resolution omics data from commercial astronauts
during the Inspiration4 mission; the project included multi-omics
spatial mapping, single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq), single-cell RNA-
seq (scRNA-seq), and single-cell Assay for Transposase-Accessible
Chromatin sequencing (scATAC-seq). Civilian missions may greatly
contribute to advancing the spaceﬂight omics ﬁeld, given that many
commercial spaceﬂight participants have expressed voluntary interest
in participating in space biomedical research and sharing data for
biobanks and scientiﬁc publication64,65. These technological advances
have created an unprecedented opportunity for in-depth molecular
studies in space biology in the short- and middle-term future.
In recent years, researchers on Earth have used high-resolution
omics to create a plant cell atlas (PCA)66, mouse cell atlas (MCA)67, and
human cell atlas (HCA)68. These initiatives aim to construct thorough
spatial maps of all cells in organisms as references for research, diag-
nosis, monitoring, and treatment of disease69, and assist in the devel-
opment of better therapies. Contemporary routine blood tests that
provide rough counts of white and red blood cells could become
acutely more informative if cell types and states can be discerned with
ﬁner granularity. This could lead to improved diagnostic tests that
detect infections before clinical symptoms are present, representing a
shift from reactionary treatment of health issues towards a pre-
ventative approach69.
As society becomes increasingly spacefaring, one can envision the
development of parallel initiatives to the PCA, MCA, and HCA that are
speciﬁc to the space environment (Fig. 2). A plant, mouse, and human
cell space atlas (PCSA, MCSA, and HCSA) could improve our under-
standing of how each system responds to spaceﬂight and hence
enhance health monitoring capabilities during prolonged space mis-
sions. Having access to the different changes occurring at the spatial
cell type level in key organs between ground control and ﬂight con-
ditions would allow researchers to better understand how cell-cell
interactions are altered by spaceﬂight70,71,72.
These insights could therefore lead to a more detailed compre-
hension of how various botanical organisms, veterinarian patients, and
human patients respond to spaceﬂight in order to design new and
substantially more precise treatments as countermeasures for health
in space. The cell space atlases could serve as openly available inter-
nationalresources developed at the start of the humanspace omics era
that span multiple generations to come, not only to characterize cel-
lular responses to spaceﬂight but also to investigate how cell cross-talk
is altered when the system is exposed to extreme environmental
conditions like space.
Human and model organism cell space atlases could be con-
structed in a minimally invasive manner, using in vitro and ex vivo
technologies. For example, tissue chips (organs on chips) could be
viable options for high-resolution space omics studies73. In the past
several years, a series of experiments have tested tissue chips on the
ISS through the Tissue Chips in Space initiative, which is a partnership
between the ISS National Lab and the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences (NCATS) at the National Institutes for Health
(NIH)74. Tissue chips are composed of human cells grown on artiﬁcial
3D scaffolds to model the structure and function of human tissues,
allowing researchers to assess how major organs and systems in the
human body respond to the extreme environment of space. Real
human tissues can also be studied in spaceﬂight following protocols
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
6

similar to the Suture in Space initiative, where living tissue from
biopsies are extracted and sutured together to serve as models to
better understand physiological mechanisms in space, including
wound repair and regeneration27. Engineers have already developed
miniaturized equipment and automation procedures for tissue chips
to be employed in low capacity during ﬂight missions. ESA plans to
develop a 3D bioprinter for the ISS that could generate human tissue
constructs in microgravity to study the complexity of cellular com-
ponent responses to the space environment27. In addition to their role
in potentially developing cell space atlases, personalized chips and
tissues could also be exposed to extreme environments before
missions to assess individual risks, and then could be placed on
spaceﬂight
to
monitor
health
changes
and
test
prospective
countermeasures.
We note that the omics methods used to construct cell space
atlases may depend on whether sample processing occurs during
spaceﬂight and/or back in terrestrial labs. For example, scRNA-seq
approaches require fresh material, whereas snRNA-seq approaches
can use frozen samples75. Spaceﬂight restrictions may also limit omics
approaches: For instance, methods may initially be proteomics-based
on orbit to successfully accommodate compact equipment that can
operate at low power13. This could potentially lead to the generation of
Fig. 2 | Cell space atlas. Multi-omic experiments, whether on Earth or in space, have
a number of complexities when designing and comparing results to other pub-
lished work. Namely, there are numerous models which could be leveraged to
investigate the molecular (omic) changes in different organ systems using different
technologies, which can then be processed and analyzed in numerous ways. Fur-
ther, experiments conducted in space may be more inﬂuenced by environmental
factors that are either regulated within the craft (such as oxygen) or not (such as
radiation). These environmental factors are crucial to understanding results and
can drastically vary by experiment. Given these complexities, understanding the
environmental factors during a mission and the exact experimental design
(including acquiring and analyzing the data), and standardizing them across
agencies will be crucial to the development of aerospace multi omic analyses.
Further, given the overall cost of these experiments as well as the limited resources
to conduct them, this centralized and normalized database, which is accessible to
other scientists, can assist our understanding of spaceﬂight risks, their counter
measurements, and monitoring.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
7

a human protein space atlas that integrates spatial mapping of human
proteomics into atlas efforts, paralleling the Human Protein Atlas
project already initiated in terrestrial healthcare76.
Overcoming these technical boundaries and optimizing the
quality of these technically novel datasets would require input from
experienced omics scientists with extensive knowledge about space-
ﬂight biology. ISSOP is composed of members with stated missions to
routinely update recommended sample processing guidelines for
space omics datasets to allow for better harmonization of data and
increased gain of knowledge77. Members have expertise related to the
processing of multi-omics data samples, and several ISSOP members
are prime contributors to the previously mentioned JAXA and NASA
projects utilizing cutting-edge and high-resolution omics techniques.
As a result, ISSOP could serve as a community that is integral for
propelling the space omics ﬁeld into the next stage of innovation with
projects related to themes such as the construction of cell space
atlases.
Alongside the technical challenges of constructing a human cell
atlas for spaceﬂight, the generation and usage of human space omics
data poses considerable ethical, cultural, and legal challenges that
would need to be carefully resolved through policy development.
Indeed, one motivation of the current perspective paper is to provide
examples of the upcoming ethical and legal complexities inherent to
the nascent human space omics discipline in order to encourage ear-
lier discussions amongst international ethicists, philosophers, scien-
tists, and the public community.
Ethical and policy considerations
As a consequence of the increasing adoption of human omics research
in space, it has become crucial to increase standardization of policies
for regulating the collection, storage, access, and usage of astronauts’
(sometimes called spaceﬂight participants, or SFPs) omics data. Based
on recommendations from a 2014 report by the National Academy of
Medicine (formerly the Institute of Medicine)78, NASA instituted a
policy (NPD 7170.1) regarding the collection and usage of genomic
data for human research. However, we are not currently aware of other
prominent space agencies - or commercial spaceﬂight companies -
publishing public policies regarding astronaut or crew omics data.
Notably, the United Nations recently formed a working group on
“Space and Global Health”. In their draft resolution (A/AC.105/C.1/
L.402), they encourage Member States to “establish a policy-enabled
environment and governance mechanisms, with due consideration of
legal and ethical issues, for removing barriers to the effective use of
space-based technologies, including telemedicine solutions”. The
current rarity of human omics collection and curation can be viewed as
a barrier to the development and deployment of emerging space-
based health technologies, including precision healthcare. Thus, in the
following section, we consider legal and ethical challenges pertaining
to policymaking in this context, concluding with some thoughts on
how best to achieve balanced policies which support space omics
research while protecting the rights of the participants (Fig. 3). Ethical
considerations of human omics research is an emerging area for
spaceﬂight79,80,59, this is just part of the bigger picture of space ethics81,
and human omics research on Earth82.
Dangers of restrictive policies: scientiﬁc potential unused
As mentioned throughout this manuscript, standardized collection
and curation of human space omics data has great potential to accel-
erate scientiﬁc research into human health in space and enable the
deployment of precision medicine technologies to improve occupa-
tional healthcare during spaceﬂight missions. Therefore, under-
utilization of the scientiﬁc and healthcare potential for human space
omics data is the primary danger of overly restrictive policies.
Firstly, if policies restrict the operational usage of human space
omics data in occupational health processes, such as countermeasure
design and long-term health monitoring, the full potential for reducing
health risks might not be realized. Consequently, this could endanger
crew members, reduce likelihood of mission success, and potentially
infringe upon the duty of care space agencies have for their astronaut
employees. This duty of care includes not just the immediate health
and safety of astronauts during missions, but also their long-term
health due to occupational exposures such as cosmic radiation78.
Secondly, if policies do not allow for sufﬁcient data to be collected
and processed from humans in space for research purposes, the pace
of space life sciences research will be slower, with increased depen-
dency on ground-based analogs. Similarly, restrictive policies for data
accessibility/sharing would also slow the pace of research. When
investigators contribute data to the scientiﬁc community through
open-science initiatives, it can be analyzed via varied approaches,
including comparatively to other datasets to yield novel insights. In the
context of spaceﬂight omics data, the value of open-science has
recently been demonstrated through a large-scale multi-omics analysis
comparing datasets from the NASA GeneLab biorepository, to uncover
mitochondrial dysregulation as a key hub of the biological response to
Fig. 3 | Ethics. Policies pertaining to the collection, storage, and usage ofomics data
from consenting astronauts and spaceﬂight participants would need to be carefully
balanced. Thorough discussion amongst international ethicists could ensure that
such policies are designed such that they are not so restrictive that they
signiﬁcantly limit the potential for scientiﬁc progress and improved occupational
healthcare in space, and not so permissible that they expose participants to
ethical harms.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
8

spaceﬂight83. Biorepositories can be leveraged with “Big data”
approaches, where patterns such as radiation sensitivity, can be
learned via the application of machine learning methods to collections
of multi-omics datasets84. With increased collection of omics data from
humans in space, these kinds of approaches could be applied to
human spaceﬂight, such as to predict susceptibility to radiation-based
health issues in individual crewmembers85. Limiting accessibility to
human space omics data creates a barrier to analysis efforts, thus every
decrement from complete open access reduces the scientiﬁc utility of
the data.
A ﬁnal consequence of restrictive policies is reductions in the
scope and precision of the data provided to the wider scientiﬁc com-
munity. For the NASA Twins study, authors of one follow-up paper that
accessed and reanalyzed the original study data indicated that single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), indels, copy number variations
(CNVs), and structural genomic elements could not be included in the
publication for conﬁdentiality purposes86, thus limiting the scope of
their public facing analysis. Regarding precision, efforts to anonymize
and sanitize the data prior to data sharing - including data aggregation
approaches and withholding metadata - could reduce the scientiﬁc
utility, particularly as individual differences, such as gene variants
associated with susceptibility to health issues, are essential informa-
tion for unlocking precision healthcare approaches63.
Dangers of permissible policies: exposure to ethical harms
On the other hand, while scientiﬁc utilization of human space omics
data could reduce health risks for crews, if policies are overly per-
missible, omics research could also lead to harm by exposing human
subjects to ethical issues. In the case of space agencies, this would also
infringe on their duty of care to their astronaut employees. Due to the
familial nature of genomics, these issues may also affect family mem-
bers. Notably, compared to typical terrestrial cohorts, many of these
ethical challenges are ampliﬁed by the unique nature of the space-
faring population; astronauts areeasily identiﬁable due to their current
rarity and status as public ﬁgures79.
One ethical issue that is particularly ampliﬁed by the standing of
astronauts is that of privacy. The term “genetic privacy” is used ubi-
quitously, yet privacy breaches could apply to any identiﬁable omic-
based personal data. Privacy breaches would involve disclosure of this
data against the will of the participants, which could lead to psycho-
logical harm. Speciﬁcally, policies may be considered overly permis-
sible if they fail to account for the risks of identiﬁability from the full
range of omic data types and data formats. It is well understood that
individuals can be identiﬁed using genomics data, such as SNPs87.
However,
identiﬁcation
via
other
omic
data
types,
such
as
transcriptomics88, proteomics89,90, microbiomics91, and combinations
of omic types (multi-omics)92, is a developing area of the literature.
Identifying speciﬁc participants becomes possible through “linkage
attacks” when phenotypic information is available in addition to the
omics data88. Due to the nature of astronauts as public ﬁgures, phe-
notypic information such as ethnicity, age, and biological sex is readily
available to the public. The small population size also means that the
number of possible matches is limited, increasing the likelihood of
successful linkage attacks. Aside from linkage attacks, privacy may also
be violated via attacks on the data storage system. Thus, policies may
be considered overly permissible if they do not ensure appropriate
security and safeguarding mechanisms against data breaches.
Relating to the issue of privacy is the ethical issue of genetic dis-
crimination, which refers to individuals receiving differential or unfair
treatment based on their genetic data. Policies permitting space
agencies to use omics data predictive of health issues, such as genetic
variants, in astronaut selection or during processes such as ﬂight
assignment, could be seen as discriminatory. Indeed, many countries
worldwide have enacted laws to prevent the use of genetic information
in employment decisions93. It is worth noting that this is somewhat of a
controversial and complex topic; for example, in the United States, the
military can use routine genetic screening results to inform assignment
decisions, such as to withhold deploying troops with G6PD deﬁciency
to locations which would require them to take antimalarial drugs, since
doing so can cause life-threatening hemolytic reactions94. While the
United States Space Force could present an interesting exception,
NASA is not a branch of the military, so it is subject to the Genetic
Information Nondiscrimination Act 2008 (GINA), and therefore it
would seem that it cannot use omic information in assignment and
employment decisions79, which is also aligned with the current NASA
policy (NPD 7170.1). However, even with precision medicine approa-
ches,
sending
an
individual
with
a
genetic
predisposition
to
spaceﬂight-associated risks, such as radiation susceptibility, on a long-
duration mission to Mars may still increase the likelihood of a serious
medical incident. Thus, it has been suggested that omic information
would be useful for spaceﬂight selection and assignment processes95.
This presents an ethical dilemma, where on the one hand, using omic
information for ﬂight assignment without the individual’s consent
could be seen as discriminatory, and on the other hand, not doing so
could potentially endanger the crew and reduce likelihood of mission
safety and success. An additional consideration here is that some
spaceﬂight-relevant genetic mutations may be linked to certain
populations on Earth, which raises further issues of equity63. Using
omics for precision healthcare does appear to be supported under the
current NASA policy and GINA80, and this could hopefully decrease
health risks associated with individual differences during spaceﬂight
missions to an acceptable level, while refraining from using omics
information for employment selection and ﬂight assignment. Alto-
gether, this balance may align with what is perhaps the current con-
sensus for an appropriate compromise, based on regulations in many
regions worldwide.
One further ethical issue that will be faced by space agencies and
commercial spaceﬂight companies collecting astronaut omics is the
risk of incidental ﬁndings80. For example, collection and analysis of
astronaut omics data could reveal unexpected ﬁndings, such as pre-
disposition to late onset Alzheimer’s disease. In some cases, these
ﬁndings may not be medically actionable. Disclosing these ﬁndings to
the astronaut could cause them and their family members psycholo-
gical harm. Policies would be seen as overly permissible if they do not
factor in the risk of incidental ﬁndings and fail to implement appro-
priate and clear procedures for disclosure and genetic counseling.
Keys to developing balanced policies
Ultimately, policymaking forhuman space omics should be considered
as a balancing act between developing policies that are not so overly
restrictive that they limit the scientiﬁc potential of the data, and not so
overly permissible that they invoke risk and expose participants and
their families to harm. Standardization of policies could ensure that an
appropriate balance is struck, safeguarding against ethical risks, while
enabling appropriate accessibility for scientiﬁc and healthcare utili-
zation of the data. This need for balance is embedded into the mixed
role of space agencies, as research institutions and clinical care pro-
viders for astronaut employees80. While each dataset may still need to
be considered on a case-by-case basis, such as for assessing identiﬁa-
bility of the data, clear policy frameworks could reduce bias and help
to prevent unwarranted delays associated with unstandardized policy.
As the number of humans and enterprises in space increases, and the
understanding of omics increases in the context of ethical issues
including privacy and discrimination, standards will need to be con-
tinually reassessed and updated.
It is worth noting that while ethical challenges such as privacy are
certainly ampliﬁed at present by the relatively unique standing of
astronauts as a small cohort of ﬁgures in the public spotlight, to some
extent, these issues are also shared by rare disease cohorts and elite
athlete cohorts on Earth, and so existing policies in areas including
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
9

handling incidental ﬁndings and data sharing appear to present an apt
starting point for discussion96.
It is essential that standardization of policymaking for human
space omics be considered with an international perspective, as space
agencies and commercial companies are subject to different laws
based on geographical region, and may also be inﬂuenced by cultural
differences81,97. For example, laws surrounding genetic discrimination
and handling of incidental ﬁndings vary internationally93,98. Where
appropriate, policies should aim to ﬁnd harmonious solutions within
the framework of internationally established legislation, such as the
Declaration of Helsinki99, respecting the rights of the human data
subjects while giving careful consideration to the speciﬁc challenges of
the astronaut or crew population and the societal role of human
spaceﬂight. On the ISS, the IGA (intergovernmental agreement)
extends the jurisdiction of countries to their registered elements and
personnel; for example, European law applies to European astronauts
and the Columbus laboratory module on the ISS, with the existence of
member state national laws adding further complexity59. Conversely,
the Human Research Multilateral Review Board (HRMRB) is a review
board between international partners to ensure that all human subject
research onboard the ISS is conducted ethically according to inter-
nationally agreed principles. It is likely that future missions, including
commercial missions involving multi-national participants, will require
similar navigation of international laws to create policies. This need to
design harmonious international policy raises concerns over fairness;
for example, if a country has more restrictive laws in areas such as data
protection, it may become challenging for citizens of that country to
participate in international space missions, omic studies, and omic-
based technologies such as precision healthcare.
Similarly, given the role of international collaboration in human
spaceﬂight research, establishing clear and harmonious policies for
lawful sharing and processing of human space omics data will be
crucial100. Where human space omics data is deemed to be identiﬁable,
databases should adhere to high standards of security, and access
levels or other technical solutions for reducing ethical harm risks
should be considered101. For example, data sanitization methods can
manipulate the data to reduce the risk of identiﬁcation88, but should be
balanced against the potential loss of scientiﬁc utility. Additionally,
federated approaches102, such as federating learning for training AI
models without moving the data across jurisdictions, could prove
useful103,104. In adherence to FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable
and Reusable) principles105, human space omics data should be as “as
open as possible, as closed as necessary”, in order to maximize sci-
entiﬁc utility while protecting the rights of the participants.
Furthermore, an important aspect of developing appropriate
policies will be striving for meaningful informed consent from parti-
cipants, both in terms of consenting to venture into space, and con-
senting to the collection, usage, and sharing of their omics data. To the
former point, omics technologies, such as predicted risk based on
individual differences, could help to provide participants with addi-
tional data, enabling greater decision autonomy to improve the
informed consent process for space travel. Broad consent has been
proposed as a potential solution to gain consent in the context of
omics research, where it may be hard to deﬁne future uses of the data
at a granular level, and the identiﬁability risks of different omics data
types may be challenging to accurately quantify106. When carefully
implemented, it has been argued that broad consent may be an
appropriate choice for obtaining consent in the context of space omics
studies and has been used in the recent commercial spaceﬂight health
data repository established by the Cornell Aerospace Medicine Bio-
bank and the Translational Research Institute for Space Health
(TRISH)65.
Discussions regarding the development of appropriate policies
need to commence early, so that anticipatory policies are ready as the
science is ready80. With deep molecular proﬁling of astronauts now at
the forefront of space biology research, and a key part of the climate of
commercial spaceﬂight and ambitious missions outside of LEO, now
would seem the opportune time to kick-start discussions into appro-
priate policy design. ISSOP, with its international membership and
links to NASA GeneLab and the ESA Space Omics Topical Team, is well
positioned to help guide standardization of policy-making regarding
astronaut or commercial crews’ omics data, particularly from a scien-
tiﬁc perspective. ISSOP can workclosely with groups such asthe Global
Alliance for Genomic Health (GA4GH) to merge expertise in spaceﬂight
omics research and terrestrial omics policymaking, which could help
to ensure that policies maximize scientiﬁc utility while protecting the
rights of the astronauts and crews.
Conclusions
In the coming years, humans may venture into space for unprece-
dented durations and distances outside of the Earth’s radio-
protective magnetosphere. Resupply and evacuation would be
precluded in some cases, calling for a modernized spaceﬂight
nutrition, wellness, and telehealth ﬁeld that would likely incorporate
molecular omics. Precision healthcare is becoming more common-
place for populations on Earth, where international consortiums are
using high-resolution omics to construct the Human Cell Atlas. It
seems probable that as increasingly large and diverse populations
enter space, the purposeful implementation of routine standardized
omics with consenting participants during spaceﬂight could similarly
permit precision space healthcare and a Human Cell Space Atlas. The
cell space atlas could serve as an open access, global reference for
basic space life science research. While human space omics could
catalyze critical improvement of safety measures for future space
travelers, numerous ethical, cultural, and legal challenges would
need to be carefully surmounted from global viewpoints. This
manuscript provided examples of both the potential healthcare
beneﬁts and the ethical complexities that will likely be inherent to the
human space omics discipline as a means to encourage anticipatory
discussions amongst international ethicists, philosophers, scientists,
and the public community.
References
1.
Summers, R. L., Johnston, S. L., Marshburn, T. H. & Williams, D. R.
Emergencies in space. Ann. Emerg. Med. 46, 177–184 (2005).
2.
Gao, P. et al. Precision environmental health monitoring by long-
itudinal exposome and multi-omics proﬁling. Genome Res. 32,
1199–1214 (2022).
3.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: A multi-
dimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science
364, eaau8650 (2019). The study compared identical twin
astronauts (one in spaceﬂight and one on Earth) and demon-
strated the importance of integrating various modalities
(including omics) to more comprehensively understand the
longitudinal effects of long-duration spaceﬂight on the
human body.
4.
Mason, C. E. The Next 500 Years: Engineering Life to Reach New
Worlds. (MIT Press, 2021).
5.
Da Silveira W. A. et al. Revamping Space-omics in Europe. Cell
Syst. 11, 555–556 (2020).
6.
Deane, C. S., da Silveira, W. A. & Herranz, R., Space Omics Topical
Team. Space omics research in Europe: Contributions, geo-
graphical distribution and ESA member state funding schemes.
iScience 25, 103920 (2022).
7.
Berrios, D. C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S. & Costes, S. V.
NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D1515–D1522 (2021).
8.
Dursi, L. J. et al. CanDIG: Federated network across Canada for
multi-omic and health data discovery and analysis. Cell Genom. 1,
100033 (2021).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
10

9.
Brzhozovskiy, A. et al. Label-free study of cosmonaut’s urinary
proteome changes after long-duration spaceﬂights. Eur. J. Mass
Spectrom. 23, 225–229 (2017).
10.
Liu, Z. et al. Effects of spaceﬂight on the composition and function
of the human gut microbiota. Gut Microbes 11, 807–819 (2020).
11.
Ansdell, M., Ehrenfreund, P. & McKay, C. Stepping stones toward
global space exploration. Acta Astronaut. 68, 2098–2113 (2011).
12.
Schmidt, M. A., Schmidt, C. M., Hubbard, R. M. & Mason, C. E. Why
personalized medicine is the frontier of medicine and perfor-
mance for humans in space. New Space 8, 63–76 (2020).
13.
Schmidt, M. A. & Goodwin, T. J. Personalized medicine in human
space ﬂight: using Omics based analyses to develop individua-
lized countermeasures that enhance astronaut safety and perfor-
mance. Metabolomics 9, 1134–1156 (2013).
14.
Ginsburg, G. S. & Phillips, K. A. Precision medicine: from science to
value. Health Affairs 37, 694–701 (2018).
15.
Makedonas, G. et al. Speciﬁc immunologic countermeasure pro-
tocol for deep-space exploration missions. Front. Immunol. 10,
2407 (2019).
16.
Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental biological features of space-
ﬂight: advancing the ﬁeld to enable deep-space exploration. Cell
184, 6002 (2021).
17.
Jost, P. D. Simulating human space physiology with bed rest.
Hippokratia 12, 37–40 (2008).
18.
Wotring, V. E. The risk of therapeutic failure due to ineffective
medications Technical Report NASA/JSC-CN-24713 (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2011).
19.
Putcha, L., Berens, K. L., Marshburn, T. H., Ortega, H. J. & Billica, R.
D. Pharmaceutical use by U.S. astronauts on space shuttle mis-
sions. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 70, 705–708 (1999).
20.
Wotring, V. E. Chemical potency and degradation products of
medications stored over 550 earth days at the International Space
Station. AAPS J. 18, 210–216 (2016).
21.
Du, B. et al. Evaluation of physical and chemical changes in
pharmaceuticals ﬂown on space missions. AAPS J. 13,
299–308 (2011).
22.
Blue, R. S. et al. Supplying a pharmacy for NASA exploration
spaceﬂight: challenges and current understanding. NPJ Micro-
gravity 5, 14 (2019).
23.
Kast, J., Yu, Y., Seubert, C. N., Wotring, V. E. & Derendorf, H. Drugs
in space: pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in astronauts.
Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 109S, S2–S8 (2017).
24.
Kim, M. & Plante, I. An Assessment of How Radiation Incurred
during a Mars Mission Could Affect Food and Pharmaceuticals.
(Wyle Science, Technology, and Engineering Group, 2015).
25.
Stingl, J. C., Welker, S., Hartmann, G., Damann, V. & Gerzer, R.
Where failure is not an option—personalized medicine in astro-
nauts. PLoS ONE 10, e0140764 (2015).
26.
Gaedigk, A., Sangkuhl, K., Whirl-Carrillo, M., Klein, T. & Leeder, J. S.
Prediction of CYP2D6 phenotype from genotype across world
populations. Genet. Med. 19, 69–76 (2017).
27.
Pavez Loriè, E. et al. The future of personalized medicine in space:
from observations to countermeasures. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol.
9, 739747 (2021).
28.
Guengerich, F. P. & Peter Guengerich, F. Cytochrome P450 and
chemical toxicology. Chemical Research in Toxicology 21,
70–83 (2008).
29.
Mathyk, B. A. et al. Spaceﬂight alters insulin and estrogen sig-
naling pathways. Res. Sq. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-
2362750/v1 (2023).
30.
Chancellor, J. C. et al. Limitations in predicting the space radiation
health risk for exploration astronauts. NPJ Microgravity 4, 8 (2018).
31.
Blue, R. S. et al. Challenges in clinical management of radiation-
induced illnesses during exploration spaceﬂight. Aerosp. Med
Hum. Perform. 90, 966–977 (2019).
32.
Barger, L. K. et al. Prevalence of sleep deﬁciency and use of
hypnotic drugs in astronauts before, during, and after spaceﬂight:
an observational study. Lancet Neurol. 13, 904–912 (2014).
33.
Moltke, L. L. V. et al. Zolpidem metabolism in vitro: responsible
cytochromes, chemical inhibitors, and in vivo correlations. Br. J.
Clin. Pharmacol. 48, 89–97 (1999).
34.
Dinges, D. F., Basner, M., Ecker, A. J., Baskin, P. & Johnston, S. L.
Effects of zolpidem and zaleplon on cognitive performance after
emergent morning awakenings at Tmax: a randomized placebo-
controlled trial. Sleep 42, zsy258 (2019).
35.
Norsk, P. et al. Unexpected renal responses in space. Lancet 356,
1577–1578 (2000).
36.
Grigoriev, A. I. et al. Preliminary medical results of the Mir year-
long mission. Acta Astronaut 23, 1–8 (1991).
37.
Dello Russo, C. et al. Physiological adaptations affecting drug
pharmacokinetics in space: what do we really know? A critical
review of the literature. Br. J. Pharmacol. 179, 2538–2557 (2022).
38.
Lee, A. G. et al. Spaceﬂight associated neuro-ocular syndrome
(SANS) and the neuro-ophthalmologic effects of microgravity: a
review and an update. npj Microgravity 6, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41526-020-0097-9 (2020).
39.
Ong, J. et al. Spaceﬂight associated neuro-ocular syndrome:
proposed pathogenesis, terrestrial analogues, and emerging
countermeasures. Br. J. Ophthalmol. 107, 895–900 (2023).
40.
Zwart, S. et al. Vision changes after spaceﬂight are related to
alterations in folate– and vitamin B-12–dependent one-carbon
metabolism. SciVee https://doi.org/10.4016/38821.01 (2012).
41.
Zwart,S. R. et al. Genotype, B-vitamin status, and androgens affect
spaceﬂight-induced ophthalmic changes. FASEB J. 30, 141–148
(2016). The research documented an association between
polymorphisms, vitamin B status, and spaceﬂight-induced
vision ailments, suggesting the importance of optimizing
nutrition during space missions.
42.
Kesler, A. et al. Thrombophilic factors in idiopathic intracranial
hypertension: a report of 51 patients and a meta-analysis. Blood
Coagulation Fibrinolysis 21, 328–333. https://doi.org/10.1097/
mbc.0b013e328338ce12 (2010).
43.
Fenech, M. Folate (vitamin B9) and vitamin B12 and their function
in the maintenance of nuclear and mitochondrial genome integ-
rity. Mutat. Res. 733, 21–33 (2012).
44.
Smith, S. M. Red blood cell and iron metabolism during space
ﬂight. Nutrition 18, 864–866 (2002).
45.
Jahanshad, N. et al. Brain structure in healthy adults is related to
serum transferrin and the H63D polymorphism in the HFE gene.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, E851–E859 (2012).
46.
Smith, S. M., Zwart, S. R., Block, G., Rice, B. L. & Davis-Street, J. E.
The nutritional status of astronautsis altered after long-term space
ﬂight aboard the International Space Station. J. Nutr. 135,
437–443 (2005).
47.
Broedbaek, K. et al. Urinary excretion of biomarkers of oxidatively
damaged DNA and RNA in hereditary hemochromatosis. Free
Radic. Biol. Med. 47, 1230–1233 (2009).
48.
Hartwig, A. Role of magnesium in genomic stability. Mutat. Res.
475, 113–121 (2001).
49.
Lang, T. et al. Towards human exploration of space: the THESEUS
review series on muscle and bone research priorities. NPJ Micro-
gravity 3, 8 (2017).
50.
Prietl, B., Treiber, G., Pieber, T. & Amrein, K. Vitamin D and immune
function. Nutrients 5, 2502–2521 (2013).
51.
Kongsbak, M., Levring, T. B., Geisler, C. & von Essen, M. R. The
vitamin D receptor and T cell function. Front. Immunol. 4, https://
doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2013.00148 (2013).
52.
Usategui-Martín, R., De Luis-Román, D.-A., Fernández-Gómez, J.
M., Ruiz-Mambrilla, M. & Pérez-Castrillón, J.-L. Vitamin D receptor
(VDR) gene polymorphisms modify the response to vitamin D
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
11

supplementation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutri-
ents 14, 360 (2022).
53.
Qi, Q. et al. Vitamin D metabolism-related genetic variants, dietary
protein intake and improvement of insulin resistance in a 2 year
weight-loss trial: POUNDS Lost. Diabetologia 58, 2791–2799 (2015).
54.
Merino, J. et al. Genome-wide meta-analysis of macronutrient
intake of 91,114 European ancestry participants from the cohorts
for heart and aging research in genomic epidemiology con-
sortium. Mol. Psychiatry 24, 1920–1932 (2019).
55.
Zhang, X. et al. FTO genotype and 2-year change in body com-
position and fat distribution in response to weight-loss diets: the
POUNDS LOST Trial. Diabetes 61, 3005–3011 (2012).
56.
Leach, C. S., Johnson, P. C. & Cintron, N. M. The endocrine system
in space ﬂight. Acta Astronautica 17, 161–166 (1988).
57.
Bergouignan, A. et al. Towards human exploration of space: The
THESEUS review series on nutrition and metabolism research
priorities. NPJ Microgravity 2, 16029 (2016).
58.
Heer, M., De Santo, N. G., Cirillo, M. & Drummer, C. Body mass
changes, energy, and protein metabolism in space. Am. J. Kidney
Dis. 38, 691–695 (2001).
59.
Cope, H. et al. Routine omics collection is a golden opportunity for
European human research in space and analog environments.
Patterns Prejudice 3, 100550 (2022).
60.
Li, X. et al. Digital health: tracking physiomes and activity using
wearable biosensors reveals useful health-related information.
PLoS Biol. 15, e2001402 (2017).
61.
Hughson, R. L. et al. Increased postﬂight carotid artery stiffness
and inﬂight insulin resistance resulting from 6-mo spaceﬂight in
male and female astronauts. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.
310, H628–H638 (2016).
62.
Overbey, E. G. et al. Challenges and considerations for single-cell
and spatially resolved transcriptomics sample collection during
spaceﬂight. Cell Rep. Methods 2, 100325 (2022).
63.
Rutter, L. A. et al. Protective alleles and precision healthcare in
crewed spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. (2024).
64.
Stepanek, J., Blue, R. S. & Parazynski, S. Space medicine in the
era of civilian spaceﬂight. Reply. N. Engl. J. Med. 380,
e50 (2019).
65.
Urquieta, E., Wu, J., Hury, J. & Donoviel, D. Establishment of an
open biomedical database for commercial spaceﬂight. Nat. Med.
28, 611–612 (2022).
66.
Rhee, S. Y., Birnbaum, K. D. & Ehrhardt, D. W. Towards building a
Plant Cell Atlas. Trends Plant Sci. 24, 303–310 (2019).
67.
Han, X. et al. Mapping the mouse cell Atlas by microwell-seq. Cell
173, 1307 (2018).
68.
Regev, A. et al. The Human Cell Atlas. Elife 6, (2017). The project
describes the international collaboration to create a Human
Cell Atlas that can provide better resolution of cellular dys-
function in human diseases.
69.
Rozenblatt-Rosen, O., Stubbington, M. J. T., Regev, A. & Teich-
mann, S. A. The Human Cell Atlas: from vision to reality. Nature
550, 451–453 (2017).
70.
Masarapu, Y. et al. Spatially resolved multiomics on the neuronal
effects induced by spaceﬂigh. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-024-48916-8 (2024).
71.
Elmentaite, R., Teichmann, S. A. & Madissoon, E. Studying immune
to non-immune cell cross-talk using single-cell technologies.
Curr. Opin. Syst. Biol. 18, 87–94 (2019).
72.
Almet, A. A., Cang, Z., Jin, S. & Nie, Q. The landscape of cell–cell
communication through single-cell transcriptomics. Curr. Opin.
Syst. Biol. 26, 12–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coisb.2021.03.
007 (2021).
73.
Zhang, B., Korolj, A., Lai, B. F. L. & Radisic, M. Advances in
organ-on-a-chip engineering. Nat. Rev. Mater. 3, 257–278
(2018).
74.
Low, L. A. & Giulianotti, M. A. Tissue chips in space: modeling
human diseases in microgravity. Pharm. Res. 37, 8 (2019). The
paper introduces the Tissue Chips in Space initiative, which will
facilitate the use of “organ-on-chips” and “tissue chips” to
study how in-vitro models of human organs and tissues respond
to spaceﬂight.
75.
Slyper, M. et al. A single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-Seq toolbox
for fresh and frozen human tumors. Nat. Med. 26, 792–802 (2020).
76.
Thul, P. J. & Lindskog, C. The human protein atlas: A spatial map of
the human proteome. Protein Sci. 27, 233–244 (2018).
77.
Rutter, L. et al. A new era for space life science: international
standards for space omics processing. Patterns 100148. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2020.100148 (2020).
78.
Committee on Ethics Principles and Guidelines for Health Stan-
dards for Long Duration and Exploration Spaceﬂights, Board on
Health Sciences Policy & Institute of Medicine. Health Standards
for Long Duration and Exploration Spaceﬂight: Ethics Principles,
Responsibilities, and Decision Framework. (National Academies
Press, 2014).
79.
Reed, R. D. & Antonsen, E. L. Should NASA Collect Astronauts’
Genetic Information for Occupational Surveillance and Research?
AMA J. Ethics 20, E849–E856 (2018).
80.
Antonsen, E. L. & Reed, R. D. Policy Considerations for Precision
Medicine in Human Spaceﬂight. Houst. J. Health Law Policy (2019).
The paper examines the need for anticipatory considerations of
cultural, legal, and ethical issues as the precision healthcare
ﬁeld begins to be applied to spaceﬂight.
81.
Arnould, J. Icarus’ Second Chance: The Basis and Perspectives of
Space Ethics (Springer Science & Business Media, 2011).
82.
Knoppers, B. M. International ethics harmonization and the global
alliance for genomics and health. Genome Med. 6, 13 (2014).
83.
da Silveira, W. A. et al. Comprehensive multi-omics analysis
reveals mitochondrial stress as a central biological hub for
spaceﬂight impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201.e20 (2020).
84.
Lewis, J. E. & Kemp, M. L. Integration of machine learning and
genome-scale metabolic modeling identiﬁes multi-omics bio-
markers for radiation resistance. Nat. Commun. 12, 2700 (2021).
85.
Belli, M., Sapora, O. & Tabocchini, M. A. Molecular targets in cel-
lular response to ionizing radiation and implications in space
radiation protection. J. Radiat. Res. 43, S13–S19 (2002).
86.
Schmidt, M. A., Meydan, C., Schmidt, C. M., Afshinnekoo, E. &
Mason, C. E. The NASA twins study: the effect of one year in space
on long-chain fatty acid desaturases and elongases. Lifestyle
Genom. 13, 107–121 (2020).
87.
Lippert, C. et al. Identiﬁcation of individuals by trait prediction
using whole-genome sequencing data. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
114, 10166–10171 (2017).
88.
Gürsoy, G. et al. Data sanitization to reduce private information
leakage from functional genomics. Cell 183, 905–917.e16 (2020).
89.
Geyer, P. E., Mann, S. P., Treit, P. V. & Mann, M. Plasma proteomes
can be reidentiﬁable and potentially contain personally sensitive
and incidental ﬁndings. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 20, 100035 (2021).
90.
Bandeira, N., Deutsch, E. W., Kohlbacher, O., Martens, L. & Viz-
caíno, J. A. Data management of sensitive human proteomics data:
current practices, recommendations, and perspectives for the
future. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 20, 100071 (2021).
91.
Elhaik, E., Ahsanuddin, S., Robinson, J. M., Foster, E. M. & Mason, C.
E. The impact of cross-kingdom molecular forensics on genetic
privacy. Microbiome 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-021-
01076-z (2021).
92.
Dupras, C. & Bunnik, E. M. Toward a framework for assessing
privacy risks in multi-omic research and databases. Am. J.
Bioethics 21, 46–64 (2021).
93.
Joly, Y., Dupras, C., Pinkesz, M., Tovino, S. A. & Rothstein, M. A.
Looking beyond GINA: policy approaches to address genetic
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
12

discrimination. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 21,
491–507 (2020).
94.
Mehlman, M. J. & Parasidis, E. Predictive genetic testing by the U.S.
military: legal and ethical issues. Mil. Med. 186, 726–732 (2021).
95.
Cortese, F. et al. Vive la radiorésistance!: converging research in
radiobiology and biogerontology to enhance human radio-
resistance for deep space exploration and colonization. Onco-
target 9, 14692–14722 (2018).
96.
Nguyen, M. T. et al. Model consent clauses for rare disease
research. BMC Med. Ethics 20, 55 (2019). The paper demon-
strates how global task forces can work together to improve
consent procedures for rare disease research, which may be
applicable to space travelers (who are also small in number and
may present with conditions not present in the terrestrial
population).
97.
Boyd, J. E. et al. Cultural differences in crewmembers and mission
control personnel during two space station programs. Aviat.
Space Environ. Med. 80, 532–540 (2009).
98.
Thorogood, A., Dalpé, G. & Knoppers, B. M. Return of individual
genomic research results: are laws and policies keeping step? Eur.
J. Hum. Genet. 27, 535–546 (2019).
99.
World Medical Association World Medical Association Declaration
of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical research involving
human subjects. JAMA 310, 2191–2194 (2013).
100. Saulnier, K. M. et al. Beneﬁts and barriers in the design of har-
monized access agreements for international data sharing. Sci.
Data 6, 297 (2019).
101.
Kaye, J. et al. Access Governance for Biobanks: The Case of the
BioSHaRE-EU Cohorts. Biopreserv. Biobank. 14, 201–206 (2016).
102.
Thorogood, A. et al. International Federation of Genomic Medicine
Databases using GA4GH standards. Cell Genom. 1, 100032 (2021).
103.
Rieke, N. et al. The future of digital health with federated learning.
NPJ Digit Med. 3, 119 (2020).
104.
Casaletto, J. et al. Federated analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 varia-
tion in a Japanese cohort. Cell Genom. 2, 100109 (2022).
105.
Wilkinson, M. D. et al. The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientiﬁc
data management and stewardship. Sci. Data 3, 160018 (2016).
106.
Steinsbekk, K. S., Kåre Myskja, B. & Solberg, B. Broad consent
versus dynamic consent in biobank research: is passive partici-
pation an ethical problem? Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 21, 897–902 (2013).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Jimin Guo (National Research Council Canada), S.
Anand Narayanan (Florida State University), Manuel Fernandez Rojo
(IMDEA-Food Institute Madrid), Liz Warren (Blue Origin), Ryan T. Scott
(KBR; NASA Ames Research Center), and the Global Alliance for Geno-
mics and Health (GA4GH) for valuable feedback on this manuscript.
L.A.R. and M.M. are supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) funding JP15H05940 and JP20H03234. L.A.R. is sup-
ported by the JSPS postdoctoral fellowship P20382. European (H.C.,
N.J.S., R.H., and S.G.) contribution is supported by ESA Topical Team
“Space Omics: Towards an integrated ESA/NASA—omics database for
spaceﬂight and ground facilities experiments” grant 4000131202/20/
NL/PG/pt to R.H. S.G. is supported by Formas grant 2017-01066_3. H.C.
is supported by the Horizon Centre for Doctoral Training at the University
of Nottingham (UKRI Grant No. EP/S023305/1). N.J.S. is supported by
NASA (NSSC22K0250, NSSC22K0278). S.A.P. is supported by the Min-
istry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, No.
075-1502020-919. D.T. is supported by the Department of Biomedical
and Health Informatics and The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
Research Institute. C.E.M. thanks the Scientiﬁc Computing Unit (SCU) at
WCM, the WorldQuant and GI Research Foundation, NASA
(NNX14AH50G, NNX17AB26G, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2, 80NSSC22K0254,
80NSSC23K0832, the Translational Research Institute through NASA
Cooperative Agreement NNX16AO69A), the National Institutes of Health
(R01MH117406), and the LLS (MCL7001-18, LLS 9238-16, 7029-23). R.B.
was supported by the NASA GeneLab Innovation Award from NRA
NNH16ZTT001N-GL and Yuri Gravity. S.V.C. is supported by Open Sci-
ence Projects at NASA Ames Research Center, through NASA’s BPS
division in the Science Missions Directorate; any use of trade names is for
descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the US
Government.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: L.A.R., H.C., M.J.M., S.A.P., R.B., D.B., N.J.S., M.M.,
C.E.M. and S.G. Methodology: L.A.R., M.J.M., C.E.M. and S.G. Software:
M.J.M. Formal Analysis: L.A.R. and M.J.M. Investigation: L.A.R., H.C.,
M.J.M., C.E.M. and S.G. Resources: C.E.M. and S.G. Data Curation: L.A.R.
and M.J.M. Visualization: M.J.M. Writing-Original Draft: L.A.R., H.C.,
D.M.T., N.J.S., D.B. and S.G. Writing-Review and Editing: L.A.R., H.C.,
R.H., S.D., S.V.C., A.M.P., R.B., D.M.T., D.B., N.J.S., M.M., C.E.M. and S.G.
Supervision: R.B., D.M.T., M.M., C.E.M. and S.G. Project Administration:
C.E.M. and S.G. Funding Acquisition: R.H., D.M.T., M.M., C.E.M. and S.G.
Competing interests
D.B. is Co-founder of Poppy Health, Inc. and CSO of Yuri Gravity GmbH;
C.E.M is Co-Founder of Onegevity Health; S.G. is scientiﬁc advisor to 10x
Genomics, which holds IP right to the ST technology, and holds stocks.
The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Christopher E. Mason or Stefania Giacomello.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Afshin
Beheshti and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to
the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-47237-0
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4952 
13
