iScience
Article
Beyond Low-Earth Orbit: Characterizing Immune
and microRNA Differentials following Simulated
Deep Spaceﬂight Conditions in Mice
Amber M. Paul,
Margareth Cheng-
Campbell,
Elizabeth A.
Blaber, ..., Robert
Meller, Peter
Grabham, Afshin
Beheshti
afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov
HIGHLIGHTS
Murine immune proﬁles
from simulated deep
spaceﬂight conditions
were analyzed
Immune proﬁling revealed
unique immune diversity
with each experimental
condition
Plasma microRNA
sequence analysis
revealed involvement in
immune system
dysregulation
Astronaut data showed
elevated inﬂammation
during low-Earth orbit
missions
Paul et al., iScience 23, 101747
December 18, 2020 ª 2020
The Author(s).
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2020.101747
ll
OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article
Beyond Low-Earth Orbit: Characterizing
Immune and microRNA Differentials following
Simulated Deep Spaceﬂight Conditions in Mice
Amber M. Paul,1,2 Margareth Cheng-Campbell,3 Elizabeth A. Blaber,2,3 Sulekha Anand,4 Sharmila Bhattacharya,2
Sara R. Zwart,5 Brian E. Crucian,6 Scott M. Smith,6 Robert Meller,7 Peter Grabham,8 and Afshin Beheshti9,10,*
SUMMARY
Spaceﬂight missions can cause immune system dysfunction in astronauts with lit-
tle understanding of immune outcomes in deep space. This study assessed im-
mune responses in mice following ground-based, simulated deep spaceﬂight con-
ditions, compared with data from astronauts on International Space Station
missions. For ground studies, we simulated microgravity using the hindlimb un-
loaded mouse model alone or in combination with acute simulated galactic cosmic
rays or solar particle events irradiation. Immune proﬁling results revealed unique
immune diversity following each experimental condition, suggesting each
stressor results in distinct circulating immune responses, with clear consequences
for deep spaceﬂight. Circulating plasma microRNA sequence analysis revealed
involvement in immune system dysregulation. Furthermore, a large astronaut
cohort showed elevated inﬂammation during low-Earth orbit missions, thereby
supporting our simulated ground experiments in mice. Herein, circulating im-
mune biomarkers are deﬁned by distinct deep space irradiation types coupled
to simulated microgravity and could be targets for future space health initiatives.
INTRODUCTION
Recent studies indicate astronauts in low-Earth orbit (LEO), such as on the International Space Station (ISS),
experience immune dysfunction, for instance, redox imbalance, elevated inﬂammation, elevated granulo-
cytes, inhibited lymphocyte proliferation, and reduced lymphocyte functions (Crucian et al., 2015; Douda
et al., 2015; Leliefeld et al., 2016; Martinez et al., 2015; Mehta et al., 2017; Pecaut et al., 2017). However, less
is known about the likely biological (immune system) consequences of deep space exploration.
Solar particle event (SPE) and galactic cosmic ray (GCR) irradiation are charged particle ionizing types of
radiation that will impact humans and spacecraft during lunar and deep spaceﬂight missions (Sridharan
et al., 2020). High doses of these types of charged ionizing radiation types do not typically pose a threat
to Earth, as we are shielded by the Earth’s magnetosphere (Simonsen et al., 2020); however, astronauts
on future missions to the lunar surface and Mars will have limited shielding from these damaging irradia-
tion. Although doses experienced in deep space do not parallel those of LEO manned missions, health
risks associated with LEO doses are still considerable. For instance, current missions in LEO, such as on
the ISS, experience a low total absorbed dose of irradiation, estimated to be exposed to approximately
0.10–0.52 mGy/day, depending on the mission, as quantiﬁed by NASA GeneLab’s environmental data
for spaceﬂight experiments (Miller, 2020).
SPE irradiation originates from protons being emitted during solar ﬂares and coronal mass ejections (Narici et al.,
2018; Sanzari et al., 2015), and although the majority of the ions are protons at different energies during these
events, it can also include other ions such as helium and high- (H) atomic number (Z) and energy (E) ions (Hu,
2017). Limited number of human reports following SPE irradiation exposure are associated with astronauts on
LEO spacewalks and lunar missions from the Apollo era (Romero-Weaver et al., 2013; Sanzari et al., 2013). The
physiological effects of SPE irradiation exposureinclude fatigue,acuteradiation sickness, long-termskindamage,
elevated cytokine storms, and decreased blood and hemopoietic cell numbers (Romero-Weaver et al., 2013; San-
zari et al., 2013).
1Universities Space Research
Association, Columbia, MD
21046, USA
2Space Biosciences Division,
NASA Ames Research
Center, Moffett Field, CA
94043, USA
3Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Center for
Biotechnology &
Interdisciplinary Studies,
Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA
4Department of Biological
Sciences, San Jose State
University, San Jose, CA
95112, USA
5Department of Preventive
Medicine and Community
Health, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston,
TX 77555, USA
6NASA Johnson Space
Center, Houston, TX 77058,
USA
7Department of
Neurobiology/
Pharmacology, Morehouse
School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA 30310, USA
8Center for Radiological
Research, Columbia
University, New York, NY
10027, USA
9KBR, Space Biosciences
Division, NASA Ames
Research Center, Moffett
Field, CA 94043, USA
10Lead Contact
*Correspondence:
afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2020.101747
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020 ª 2020 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS

Figure 1. Immune Organs and Total Leukocyte Populations Display Disparities following Simulated Deep Space
Exposures
(A) Experimental plan timeline: 15-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were cage acclimated for 3 days (day 3) before
experimental initiation (0). Mice were either normally loaded (NL, shaded) or hindlimb unloaded (HU, not shaded) for
14 days. On day 13 mice were whole body irradiated with Sham (0 Gy, green), galactic cosmic rays (GCR, 0.5 Gy, blue),
solar particle events (SPE, 1 Gy, red), or gamma (5 Gy, yellow) irradiation types (formulas described in Methods). 24 h post-
irradiation (day 14), mice were euthanized and blood and tissues were collected. Body weights were measured on days
3, 0, 7, and 14. Tissue weights were measured on collection day 14.
(B–G) (B) Body weights were measured on days 3, 0, 7, and 14. Immune organ weights of the spleen (C) and the thymus
(D) were performed on collection day 14 and normalized to total body weight (g/g). Flow cytometric gating scheme to
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

GCR irradiation is emitted from the sun, stars, and energetic objects such as supernova (Nelson, 2016) and con-
sists of high-energy protons, helium nuclei, and high-energy high-charge (HZE) ions with intrinsic masses (for
example, iron, silicon, oxygen, and carbon) (Nelson, 2016). As the predicted dose for ISS missions, in the absence
of SPE irradiation events, is 0.10–0.52 mGy/day (Miller, 2020), astronauts inLEO could therefore be exposedupto
a roughly estimated 0.1 Gy/year of irradiation. Moreover, during SPE events, astronauts could experience an
extremely high dose of protons (Hu, 2017) possibly up to 1 Gy or more (Wu et al., 2009), which would pose sig-
niﬁcant health risks. NASA estimates that the amount of GCR irradiation exposure during deep space missions
may be 0.3–0.6 mGy/day or more over a 3-year-long mission to Mars (0.245–0.360 Gy) (Nelson, 2016).
Linear energy transfer (LET) is deﬁned as the amount of energy that is deposited or transferred in a material from
an ion (Chancellor et al., 2018). High-LET irradiation can cause more damaging ionizing tracks and pose a higher
relative biological effectiveness (RBE) risk compared to low-LET irradiation (Niemantsverdriet et al., 2012). How-
ever, this does not rule out the composite effects of low-LET continuous dose/dose rate involved during space-
ﬂight (Cekanaviciute et al., 2018; Saha et al., 2014), the effects of low LET inhibition of angiogenesis (Grabham
et al., 2013), or the range of cellular damage by low-LET particles (Nelson, 2016). RBE is the relative amount of
biological damage a dose of irradiation will have on tissue (Chancellor et al., 2018). Thus, identifying the immune
responses following distinct ionizing irradiation types, along with described dosing schemes, RBEs, and pro-
tracted exposures, are essential for future exploration missions to the lunar surface and Mars.
Due to limitations of performing deep space missions, there have been multiple ground-based research
studies examining the effects of ionizing irradiation on immunity. For instance, large disparities in immune
population subtypes, in particular lymphocytes (Fernandez-Gonzalo et al., 2017; Gridley and Pecaut, 2011;
Gridley et al., 2002; Romero-Weaver et al., 2013; Sanzari et al., 2013) and induction of inﬂammation (Baselet
et al., 2019; Garrett-Bakelman et al., 2019; Li et al., 2014; Teresa Pinto et al., 2016), have been reported.
However, more information is required on the deep space-relevant spectra of irradiation effects on
immunity.
With recent advancements in simulated GCR and SPE dosing schemes at NASA’s Space Radiation Labo-
ratory (NSRL) within Brookhaven National Laboratory, the biological effects of realistic deep space expo-
sures can now be successfully measured in ground-based studies (Simonsen et al., 2020). Therefore, our
study sought to investigate the immediate-early immune effects following acute simulated GCR and SPE
irradiation, singly or in combination with simulated microgravity (hindlimb unloading, HU) in mice. We hy-
pothesized that unique immune signatures and microRNA (miRNA) proﬁles would be produced by distinct
experimental conditions of simulated GCR, SPE, and gamma irradiation, singly or in combination with HU.
Although this study focuses on immune dysregulation during deep spaceﬂight, the knowledge gained from
these studies can be applied to related issues on Earth such as, cancer radiotherapy, muscle degeneration,
and immune-related diseases.
RESULTS
Simulated Deep Space Exposures Selectively Caused Reduced Immune Organ Weight and
Total Leukocyte Populations
Mice were exposed to acute, 0.5-Gy simpliﬁed GCR simulation (GCR sim), 1-Gy SPE simulation (SPE sim), or
5Gy gamma irradiation, singly or in combination with HU (14-days total) and were weighed on days 3, 0, 7,
Figure 1. Continued
collect singlets, remove doublets, (‘‘DD’’ denotes doublet discrimination), and identify CD45+ events (E). Percent (%)
(F) and absolute counts (G) of total leukocyte populations (CD45+/all doublet discriminated events, DD) displayed for
each exposure group. A Grubbs test was performed on all datasets followed by testing for normal distribution via a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. If data were normally distributed, a one-way ANOVA Dunnett test was performed to
compare NL and HU controls to all groups and a parametric unpaired t test with Welsh’s correction was performed to
compare between similar irradiation groups. If normality was not passed, both a non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test
with a Dunn’s posthoc analysis to compare NL and HU controls with all groups and a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U
test comparing between similar irradiation groups were performed. Data in (B) represent a scatterplot. (C and D) Data
represent a box-and-whiskers plot with minimum and maximum data points. (F and G) Bar graphs data represent
means G SEM (p < 0.05, n = 8–10 per group). ‘‘*’’ denotes signiﬁcant difference between NL-Sham and associated
groups, ‘‘#’’ denotes signiﬁcant difference between HU-Sham and associated groups, and intergroup ‘‘brackets with a
&’’ denotes signiﬁcant difference between each group. Filled circles, boxes, and bars denote normal loaded (NL), and
non-ﬁlled circles, boxes, and bars denote hindlimb unloaded (HU).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
3
iScience
Article

and 14 (Figure 1A). Gamma irradiation was included to calculate the RBE of GCR sim and SPE sim. As
charged particles generally have a higher RBE than photons (gamma irradiation) we used an elevated
dose of 5 Gy. The results revealed signiﬁcant difference in body weight across GCR and SPE irradiation
combined with HU groups at 24 h post-irradiation exposures (i.e., day 14) (Figure 1B). Euthanasia was per-
formed on day 14, and select immune organs were collected and weighed to determine if spaceﬂight ex-
posures caused weight differences. Interestingly, all irradiation groups with HU had a signiﬁcant decrease
in spleen weight, compared to NL-Sham controls with intergroup comparisons between GCR and gamma
(Figure 1C). For the thymus, SPE irradiation in combination with HU groups were signiﬁcantly reduced in
weight, along with both NL- and HU-gamma cohorts, compared with NL-Sham controls (Figure 1D). To
address whether there are fewer white blood cells (WBCs) circulating within blood, which may result in
weight disparities in the immune organs, common leukocyte antigen (CD45), which labels all leukocytes,
was analyzed by ﬂow cytometry within the total doublet discriminated (DD) events (Figures 1E–1G). The re-
sults showed reduced CD45+ circulating leukocyte populations within DD events following all exposures,
compared to NL-Sham controls (Figures 1F and 1G). Collectively, these results indicate that 24 h following
combined exposures, there are immune system decrements, in both primary (thymus; SPE irradiation) and
secondary (spleen; GCR and gamma irradiation) immune organs, which may be associated with reduced
circulating leukocytes.
Innate Immune Proﬁles Revealed Distinct Populations following Simulated Deep Space
Exposures
Subgroups of leukocytes were analyzed to determine the proﬁle of innate immune cells following 24 h of
acute, simulated GCR, SPE, or gamma irradiation exposures, singly or in combination with HU (14 days).
Gating
schemes
within
CD45+
events
displayed
neutrophils
(Ly6ghighCD11b+),
eosinophils
(Ly6glowCD11b+), monocytes (Ly6gCD11b+), B cells (CD20+NK1.1-/CD45+) (Figures 2A, 3A, and S1A–
S1C), and NK/NKT cells (CD20NK1.1+/CD45+) (Figures 3A, 3C and S1D). The results revealed elevated
neutrophil populations in HU-Sham, - SPE, and gamma irradiation in combination with HU groups,
compared with NL-Sham controls (Figure 2C). No signiﬁcant differences were seen between monocytes
(Figure 2B) or neutrophils (Figure 2C) with GCR or SPE irradiation alone compared with NL-Sham controls.
There were no differences noted across all innate immune groups following GCR irradiation, singly or in
combination with HU (Figures 2B–2D and 3C). Interestingly, a signiﬁcant elevation in eosinophils (Figure 2D)
and NK/NKT (Figure 3C) cells was observed in single SPE and gamma irradiation, that was suppressed in
combination with HU, which indicates SPE and gamma irradiation selectively targets these cell types
compared to NL-Sham controls. Moreover, these results also indicate suppressed inﬂammation in
response to combination SPE and gamma irradiation with HU. Interestingly, gamma irradiation alone
induced all innate immune proﬁles, compared with NL-Sham controls, which was reduced in combination
with HU (Figures 2B–2D and 3C), indicating suppressed inﬂammation in gamma irradiation in combination
with HU. Collectively, these trends suggest that higher doses of ionizing irradiation may be more toxic,
causing heightened immunogenicity.
Adaptive Immune Proﬁles Revealed Select B, T Helper, and T Cytotoxic Lymphocytes Are
Negatively Impacted by Simulated Deep Space Exposures
Lymphocytes are sensitive to ionizing irradiation exposures, whereby irradiation initiates DNA damage
triggering apoptosis (Schaue and McBride, 2012). To assess the effects of deep space-relevant exposures
on lymphocyte proﬁles we ﬁrst assessed B cell populations. The gating scheme for B cells is displayed in
Figure 3A. Although no difference was revealed for GCR irradiation alone, compared with NL-Sham con-
trols, all other irradiation groups, singly or in combination with HU resulted in signiﬁcant reduction of B
cells, compared to NL-Sham controls (Figures 3B and S1E). These results suggest possible impairments
in antibody-producing, plasma cell differentiation. To conﬁrm impaired B cell differentiation median ﬂuo-
rescent intensity (MFI) of cell surface CD20 was assessed, as CD20 expression levels are reduced during B
cell maturation into plasma cells (Robillard et al., 2014; Styles et al., 2017). There was no reduction in B cell
surface expression of CD20 (Figure 3C), suggesting B cell differentiation processes are impaired with GCR
and SPE irradiation, singly or in combination with HU, compared with NL-Sham controls. T cell lineages
were also characterized by ﬂow cytometry in blood following space-relevant conditions, including T helper
(Th, CD8CD4+/CD3+) and T cytotoxic (Tc, CD8+CD4-/CD3+) lymphocytes (Figure 4A). The results revealed
GCR irradiation singly and in combination with HU signiﬁcantly reduced circulating Th and Tc lymphocytes,
compared to NL-Sham controls, whereas no signiﬁcant effects in T cell populations were observed with
gamma irradiation (Figures 4B–4E). In addition, SPE irradiation exposures (single and combination groups)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

also reduced Tc lymphocyte numbers (Figures 3C and 3E). Collectively, these results indicate impairment in
B cell and effector/central memory T cell adaptive immune responses following deep space-relevant expo-
sures, which can pose a major health risk limitation on future human exploration missions.
Lymphocyte Surface Expression of IL-7R Is Impacted by Simulated Deep Space Exposures,
with Elevated Neutrophil to Lymphocyte Ratio (NLR)
To assess the mechanisms involved in reduced T cell percentage, we characterized the cell surface expression of
IL-7R on circulating lymphocytes (Figures 5A and 5B). IL-7R expression varies throughout T cell development,
whereby it is expressed on single-positive naive T cells, but not activated T cells, and then is re-expressed on
memory T cells (Mazzucchelli and Durum, 2007). Furthermore, elevated IL-7R has been linked to multiple inﬂam-
matory diseases (Anderson et al., 2011; Belarif et al., 2018; Willis et al., 2012). The results revealed cell surface IL-
7R median ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) was elevated in HU-Sham, compared to NL-Sham controls, which sug-
gests enhanced inﬂammation following HU for 14 days (Figure 5C). GCR and SPE irradiation, singly and in
Figure 2. Innate Immune Proﬁles Reveal Elevated Populations in SPE and Gamma Irradiation that Are Selectively Suppressed in Combination with
HU, No Difference in Population with GCR Irradiation G HU
(A–D) (A) Representative ﬂow plots are displayed for percentage CD45+CD11b cells (bottom left box), monocytes (bottom right box), neutrophils (top right
box), and eosinophils (between right boxes). Percentage (%) of monocytes (Ly6gCD11b+/CD45+) (B), neutrophils (Ly6ghighCD11b+/CD45+) (C), and
eosinophils (Ly6glowCD11b+/CD45+) (D), are displayed within each exposure group. Bar graph data represent means G SEM (p < 0.05, n = 8–10 per group).
Statistical tests and labels are the same as Figure 1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
5
iScience
Article

combination with HU, resulted in no signiﬁcant differences in IL-7R expression, compared to NL-Sham alone,
other than GCR irradiation with HU, suggesting GCR irradiation in combination with HU may have induced
T cell activation (Figure 5C). Percentage (%) lymphocytes (SSC-A versus CD45+, plot example in Figure 1G)
further supports the damaging effects of GCR and SPE irradiation on these population types (Figure 5D).
Elevated neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR), a clinical biomarker for Paul et al., 2020 inﬂammation (Isaac
et al., 2016), was elevated in HU-Sham controls, and in all irradiation-only groups, compared to NL-Sham con-
trols, with partial reduction in combination with HU (Figure 5E). Collectively, these results suggest select T cell
activation and inﬂammation following deep space simulation.
Simulated Deep Space Exposures Induced Unique Cytokine Proﬁles
Select cytokine biomarkers consisting of pro- and anti-inﬂammatory markers were assessed in whole blood
by qPCR. The cytokine panel included Ifn-g, Il-4, Il-1b, Tnf-ɑ, iNOS, Il-6, and Il-10, and showed that unique
Figure 3. B and NK/NKT Cells Reveal Differential Population Percentages following Deep Space Exposures
(A) Representative ﬂow gating for B and NK/NKT cells percentages.
(B) Percentage (%) B cells (CD20+NK1.1-/CD45+) are displayed within total leukocyte populations.
(C) Median ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) of cell surface expression of CD20 on all CD45+ cells.
(D) Percent (%) of NK/NKT cells (NK1.1+CD20-/CD45+). Bar graph data represent means G SEM (p < 0.05, n = 7–10 per group). Statistical tests and labels are
the same as Figure 1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

cytokine proﬁles are induced in each exposure group (Figure 6A). Il-1b, a pro-inﬂammatory cytokine and
marker of the inﬂammasome complex (Rathinam and Fitzgerald, 2016), displayed elevated expression
following SPE irradiation in the single exposure group, compared to NL-sham controls (Figure 6B). GCR
irradiation displayed signiﬁcant suppression of Il-1b in combination with HU, compared to GCR irradiation
alone (Figure 6B). These results suggest combined simulated deep space exposures may have suppressed
Figure 4. Lymphocyte Immune Proﬁles Indicate T Cytotoxic and T Helper Effector Cells Are Reduced following
GCR and SPE Irradiation
(A–E) (A) Representative ﬂow gating for T cytotoxic (Tc) and T helper (Th) cells within CD3+ doublet discriminated events.
Percentage (%) and absolute counts of T helper (Th) cells (CD4+CD8-/CD3+) (B and D, respectively) and T cytotoxic (Tc)
cells (CD4CD8+/CD3+) (C and E, respectively) are displayed. Bar graph data represent means G SEM (p < 0.05, n = 7–10
per group). Statistical tests and labels are the same as Figure 1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
7
iScience
Article

inﬂammation. Il-6, another pro-inﬂammatory cytokine well known for its involvement in the acute phase
response (Tanaka et al., 2014), was induced in HU, compared with NL-Sham controls (Figure 6C), suggest-
ing exposure to simulated microgravity may induce inﬂammation. Interestingly, GCR irradiation in combi-
nation with HU resulted in Il-6 suppression (Figure 6C), supporting suppression of inﬂammation in com-
bined deep space conditions of GCR irradiation and HU. Ifn-ɣ, is a cytokine produced by Tc cells, Th1
cells, NK/NKT cells, and innate lymphoid cells-1 subtype-1 (ILC1) (Colonna, 2018). It has been associated
with NK cell activity (Lusty et al., 2017) and improved macrophage antigen presentation (Kak et al.,
2018). We found in comparison to NL-sham controls, Ifn-g was signiﬁcantly upregulated in both GCR irra-
diation exposure groups, singly or combined with HU (Figure 6D). Furthermore, gamma irradiation resulted
in increased expression of Ifn-g in combination with HU, compared with gamma irradiation alone (Fig-
ure 6D). IL-4 is typically produced by Th2 and T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, and its primary role promotes
cellular survival (Keegan and Zamorano, 1998). We found signiﬁcant fold elevation of Il-4 in all irradiation
groups in combination with HU, compared to NL-Sham controls (Figure 6E), suggesting this cytokine
may be critically involved in promoting cell survival in the remaining pool of cells following space-relevant
exposures. Collectively, these results suggest unique cytokine signatures are produced following different
simulated deep space exposures.
miRNA Proﬁling Revealed A Relationship to Immune Dysfunction in Simulated Deep Space
Exposures
miRNAs are non-coding RNA interference molecules involved in silencing post-transcriptional gene
expression (O’Brien et al., 2018). Due to their important role in gene expression regulation (O’Brien
et al., 2018), contribution to immunity (Tsitsiou and Lindsay, 2009), and importance for therapeutic pur-
poses (van Rooij and Kauppinen, 2014), we sought to assess the circulating miRNA proﬁle expressed in
the plasma following simulated deep space exposures. We focused on miRNAs in plasma, as we have
demonstrated that the immune system dysregulation is systemic and circulating (Beheshti et al., 2017,
Figure 5. Differential Expression of IL-7R Surface Expression and Elevated Neutrophil to Lymphocyte Ratio (NLR)
in Simulated Deep Space Exposures
(A and B) Representative ﬂow plot (NL-Sham control only) for lymphocytes within all events that have been doublet
discriminated (DD) (A) and IL-7R median ﬂuorescent intensity (MFI) histograms (NL- and HU-Sham only) within
lymphocytes (B).
(C) MFI of IL-7R within lymphocytes is shown.
(D) Percentage (%) lymphocytes are displayed (SSC-A versus CD45+), as shown in Figure 1G.
(E) Neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR), a measurement of subclinical Paul et al., 2020 inﬂammation (Isaac et al., 2016), is
shown. (C–E) Bar graph data represent means G SEM (p < 0.05, n = 6–10 per group). Statistical tests and labels are the
same as Figure 1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

2018, 2019; Mehta and Baltimore, 2016; Montagner et al., 2013; Schwarzenbach and Gahan, 2019). To
determine the overall impact that miRNAs have on the immune system, we ﬁrst predicted gene ontology
(GO) terms with an false discovery rate < 0.05 from processed miRNA-sequenced plasma data for all con-
ditions and ﬁltered for speciﬁc immune GO terms (Figure 7). The GO immune terms were categorized by
utilizing the GO Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) information for speciﬁc GO immune terms (Smith and
Eppig, 2009). An Upset plot (Figure S2) shows general up and down immune pathways in each listed con-
dition and the overlapping pathways between conditions. Overall, majority of the immune pathways are
downregulated. Pathways related to humoral immune responses were the exception and predicted to
be upregulated due to miRNAs, as miRNAs in general can elevate humoral immunity (Danger et al.,
2014; O’Connell et al., 2010). A more detailed analysis of the speciﬁc GO immune terms (Figure 7A) re-
vealed speciﬁc pathways clustering together following speciﬁc irradiation exposures. We conﬁrmed this
pattern of immune dysregulation in deep space exposure groups in Hallmark pathways/gene sets (Liberzon
et al., 2015) regulated by miRNAs, which showed distinct patterns within each group (Figure 7B).
Figure 6. Cytokine Proﬁles Are Distinct following Simulated Deep Space Exposures
(A–E) (A) Heatmap-generated log fold change quantitative PCR transcript values for the cytokines Ifn-g, Il-4, Il-1b, Tnf-ɑ,
iNOS, Il-6, and Il-10. Bar charts are shown for cytokines, including Il-1b (B), Il-6 (C), Ifn-ɣ (D), and Il-4 (E) using relative fold
change (RFC) and Gapdh as the normalization gene. Figures 6B–6E bar graph data represents means G SEM (p < 0.05, n =
4–10 per group). Statistical tests and labels are the same as Figure 1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
9
iScience
Article

Collectively, these results conﬁrmed that distinct immunogenic impairment following simulated deep
space exposures may be regulated by circulating factors, speciﬁcally miRNAs.
Elevated Inﬂammation in Astronauts on ISS Missions in LEO
Characterization of biomarkers of inﬂammation during spaceﬂight is critical for understanding human
adaptation to spaceﬂight. Although ionizing irradiation exposures in LEO are not at the same as doses
experienced in deep space, health risks associated with these doses are still considerable, and career
limiting. To characterize inﬂammation experienced on orbit, we re-purposed retrospective data from ISS
crewmembers participating in three experiments: Nutritional Status Assessment (2006–2012), Dietary
Intake Can Predict and Protect Against Changes in Bone Metabolism During Space Flight and Recovery
(Pro K) (2010–2015), and Biochemical Proﬁle (2013–2018). Subsets of these data have been previously pub-
lished (Crucian et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2015).
Pro-inﬂammatory IL-1b and IL-1a and pleiotropic insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 and IL-1 receptor antag-
onist (RA) were analyzed. The results showed that IGF-1 was induced at in-ﬂight day 15 and remained persis-
tent through ﬂight and during post-ﬂight return (Figure 8 and Table S1). Cytokines IL-1b and IL-1a were also
inconsistently elevated during ﬂight, compared with preﬂight, whereas both returned to pre-ﬂight levels
upon return to Earth, suggesting ground readaptation (Figure 8). In addition, IL-1RA was also elevated
in-ﬂight, and returned to pre-ﬂight baseline controls (L-45, Figure 8), indicating homeostatic inhibition of
IL-1a and/or IL-1b may also be regulated in-ﬂight. As both pro-inﬂammatory IL-1a and IL-1b levels are
Figure 7. Gene Ontology (GO) Analyses of miRNA Terms Display Select Exposures Caused Differential Immunogenic Responses
GO terms with a false discovery rate <0.05 cutoff were considered signiﬁcant. Speciﬁc immune-related GO terms were mapped to the GO Mouse Genome
Informatics (MGI) and were plotted with R packages. Biological and molecular immune pathways engaged following ionizing irradiation exposures, singly or
in combination with HU.
(A) Heatmap comparison of GO terms determined by expressed miRNAs.
(B) Heatmap comparison of Hallmark terms determined by expressed miRNAs.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

elevated in-ﬂight, along with their inhibitor IL-1RA, it indicates that other factors involved in pro-inﬂamma-
tory cytokine expression supersede IL-1RA inhibition. These studies, and others (Buchheim et al., 2019; Gar-
rett-Bakelman et al., 2019), indicate that inﬂammation is induced in LEO, although mechanisms are also in
place to maintain homeostasis, which may also apply during missions beyond LEO.
Herein, the results revealed that at 14 days post-HU and 1 day post-acute irradiation exposure, total body
and immune organ (spleen and thymus) weights were reduced, which was accompanied by reduced total
leukocytes in combination exposures, compared to NL-Sham controls. Most strikingly, reduced frequency
of T effector lymphocytes (i.e., T helper, Th and T cytotoxic, Tc cells) and B lymphocytes in the presence of
combined conditions, compared to NL-Sham controls, were noted indicating the potential for impaired
adaptive immunity. Furthermore, differential cytokine proﬁles were also characterized, which displayed
the potential for Th2 lineages to develop, while Gene Ontology (GO) and Hallmark terms determined by
circulating miRNAs displayed similar immune deviations in mice. Similarly, astronaut data revealed inﬂam-
mation occurs in LEO missions, analogous to our ground-based results in mice. Collectively, these results
demonstrate that differential immune proﬁles are probable throughout the course of long-duration,
exploratory missions in deep space and describe circulating immune biomarkers (i.e., select cell types
and miRNAs) as potential therapeutic targets to regulate immunity.
DISCUSSION
Utilizing the recently developed simpliﬁed version of the NASA consensus formula of ﬁve different ions to
simulate GCR and SPE irradiation at NSRL, our study sought to investigate the immediate-early immune
effects following acute simulated deep space exposures of ionizing irradiation, singly or in combination
with simulated microgravity in mice. We also sought to describe the contributing role of circulating miRNAs
on the immune proﬁle, as miRNAs have been identiﬁed as regulators of immunity (Baker et al., 2019;
Danger et al., 2014; Mehta and Baltimore, 2016; Montagner et al., 2013; O’Brien et al., 2018; O’Connell
et al., 2010; Tsitsiou and Lindsay, 2009). Known effects of ionizing irradiation can cause immunogenic re-
sponses (Baselet et al., 2019; Li et al., 2014; Teresa Pinto et al., 2016). Indeed, high-LET irradiation causes
more damaging tracks and elevates apoptosis, compared to low-LET irradiation (Niemantsverdriet et al.,
2012). Yet, comprehensive immune studies on the effects of acute high- and low-LET irradiation are limited
(Gridley and Pecaut, 2006). Therefore, characterizing immune proﬁles and circulating miRNAs following
distinct ionizing irradiation types are essential for successful missions to the lunar surface and Mars.
Figure 8. Elevated Markers of Inﬂammation in Astronauts on 4- to 6-Month ISS Missions
Blood samples were collected at launch minus (L-) 45 days, on Flight Day (FD)15, FD30, FD60, FD120, and FD180; post-
ﬂight samples were collected in the ﬁrst 24 h after landing and again 30 days later . Inﬂammatory markers were analyzed in
plasma for IGF-1, IL-1b, IL-1a, and IL-1RA. Repeated measures analysis of variance was conducted to test for differences
during and after ﬂight compared with preﬂight, and comparisons among time points were made using a Bonferroni t test.
Multiple comparisons were accounted for. Data represent means G SEM (***p < 0.001, n = 59 crewmembers; 47 males, 12
females). Subsets of these data have been previously published (Crucian et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2015).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
11
iScience
Article

In our study, both GCR and SPE irradiation exposures in the presence or absence of HU in mice caused a
signiﬁcant reduction in total leukocytes (Figures 1F, 1G, and S1), in particular Th and Tc cells (Figures 4B–
4E). Whole body weights were signiﬁcantly reduced in GCR and SPE irradiation groups in combination with
HU (Figure 1B) along with reduced spleen weights in GCR and gamma irradiation (Figure 1C), which may be
due to reduced circulating leukocytes (Figures 1F and 1G and S1). Furthermore, reduced thymus weights in
HU combination groups with SPE irradiation (Figure 1D) implies reduced clonal diversity of lymphocytes
during deep space exposures, which can affect adaptive immune responses against future challenges. In
line with this, miRNA immune GO terms revealed reduced spleen and thymus development following all
irradiation groups, further supporting that deep space exposures can impair immune organ development
(Figure 7A). Thus, two possible outcomes are postulated: (1) delayed lymphocyte proliferation or (2)
elevated apoptosis of both dividing and non-dividing cells. In addition, B cell differentiation and humoral
immunity were also affected in GCR and SPE irradiation groups, compared with NL-Sham controls (Figures
3B and 3C) that may be partially dependent on cytokine signals (Figure 6) and Th cell populations (Figures
4B and 4D). Innate immune proﬁles were also differentially affected following distinct exposures, adding
another layer of complexity to this model. Nonetheless, these results collectively indicate unique immuno-
genic proﬁles following different ionizing irradiation exposures, in the presence or absence of simulated
microgravity that may be useful for future space bioscience studies to expand upon.
Along with different HU cage conditions/designs, head-down tilt angles (degrees of cephalad ﬂuid shifting)
used to simulate microgravity may cause distinct immune results. For instance, Wei et al. reported reduced
thymic and spleen weights are due to lymphocyte apoptosis induced through elevated stress responses
and corticosterone production on day 10 of HU exposure (25–30 head-tilt angle) (Wei et al., 2003). How-
ever, Ferreira et al. showed no difference in body or adrenal weights following 14 or 28 days (15 head-tilt
angle) of HU (Ferreira et al., 2011). Furthermore, work by Tahimic et al. revealed spleen weights were
reduced at 30 days (30 head-tilt angle) of HU, which may have partially depended on the number of circu-
lating Th cell populations (Tahimic et al., 2019). In our study, reduced thymus, but not spleen, weights were
noted in HU-Sham, compared with NL-Sham controls (30o head-tilt angle) (Figures 1C and 1D). Further-
more, there was no signiﬁcant difference between Tc or Th populations following 14 days of HU, compared
with NL-Sham controls (Figures 4B–4E), but there were signiﬁcant reductions in total leukocyte populations
(Figures 1F and 1G) and B cells (Figure 3B). Therefore, reduced thymus weights in HU-Sham compared to
NL-Sham controls may be due to overall reduced leukocyte populations. Inﬂammation following simulated
microgravity has been recorded in multiple studies (Cavey et al., 2017; Li et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2010,
2014), with an associated mechanism of elevated neutrophil counts (Dumont et al., 2007, 2008; Frenette
et al., 2002; Tahimic et al., 2019) leading to uncontrolled musculoskeletal damage (Dumont et al., 2008;
Frenette et al., 2002). In our study, there were elevated neutrophils (Figure 2C), NLR (Figure 5E), and Il-6
(Figure 6C) after 14 days of HU, suggesting neutrophil persistence, as IL-6 protects neutrophils from
apoptosis (Asensi et al., 2004). Certainly, inﬂammatory neutrophil persistence can be damaging if not
adequately controlled (Mortaz et al., 2018). Therefore, these results indicate HU, dependent on cage con-
ditions/designs, may promote inﬂammation.
Innate immune populations were also evaluated. For one, SPE irradiation alone resulted in signiﬁcant
elevation of eosinophils (Figure 2D) and NK/NKT cell (Figure 3D) percentages, compared to NL-Sham con-
trols. Interestingly, ionizing irradiation can cause cardiovascular complications (Puukila et al., 2017), while
elevated NK cells (Ong et al., 2017) and eosinophils (Se´ gue´ la et al., 2015) can contribute to these pathol-
ogies. Gamma irradiation alone resulted in a signiﬁcant elevation in monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils,
and NK/NKT cell percentages, compared with NL-Sham controls (Figures 2B–2D and Figure 3D), suggest-
ing distinct immune proﬁles are generated between different ionizing irradiation types. Indeed, gamma
irradiation had considerable effects on innate immune cell recruitment into blood circulation, compared
with GCR and SPE irradiation, indicating different mechanisms of immunogenicity following irradiation
damage, which may be a factor of the high dose of gamma irradiation. Indeed, overall cell numbers
were reduced within all radiation exposures, compared to NL-Sham controls, indicating the damaging ef-
fects of ionizing irradiation on the immune system (Figures 1F, 1G, and S1). However, for the purpose of
establishing the RBE in this study, gamma was used at a higher dose to make comparisons between
charged particles (GCR, SPE) and photons (gamma). In addition, there are qualitative differences between
the biological effects of each, such that gamma irradiation serves as a useful high-ionization control. Inter-
estingly, all four innate populations studied are inﬂammation-producing cells upon activation and were
suppressed when gamma irradiation was combined with HU, indicating the potential for inhibited
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

inﬂammation. Similar impairment was observed in SPE irradiation in combination with HU groups in terms
of reduced eosinophil (Figure 2D) and NK/NKT cell percentages (Figure 3D). As such, a reduced number of
select innate immune cells 24 h following distinct irradiation treatments in combination with simulated
microgravity, may be a result of impaired innate immune cell recruitment. In addition, miRNA immune
GO term analyses indicated a general reduction in myeloid cell differentiation and FcR-mediated signaling
in all exposure groups, suggesting distinct biological pathways involved in phagocytosis (Koenderman,
2019) are suppressed during simulated deep space exposures (Figure 7A). Collectively, impairment in
both leukocyte recruitment and phagocytic function can result in inefﬁcient innate responses against chal-
lenges, i.e., microbial or viral. In line with this, astronauts on board the ISS experience immune dysregula-
tion and heightened infections (Cervantes and Hong, 2016; Crucian et al., 2015; Mehta et al., 2017; Nash,
2000), which may be a result of poor immunogenic innate immune responses and recruitment. However,
further studies with these distinct deep space-relevant exposures, circulating miRNAs, and cell types are
required.
Aside from elevated Ifn-g in GCR irradiation exposure groups, compared to NL-Sham controls (Figure 6D),
GCR irradiation in combination with HU displayed reduced inﬂammation compared with GCR irradiation
alone, as measured by the pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, Il-1b and Il-6. These results suggest simulated
microgravity suppressed inﬂammation in combination with GCR irradiation (Figures 6B and 6C). Indeed,
this may partially explain reduced B cell percentage in GCR irradiation with simulated microgravity (Fig-
ure 3B), as IL-6 is a plasma cell differentiator that enhances humoral immunity (Dienz et al., 2009). Further-
more, IL-6 differentiates naive T cells into T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, which drives B cell maturation into
plasma cells (Crotty, 2014). IL-1b has also recently been characterized to play an important role in Tfh
effector cell development as well (Ritvo and Klatzmann, 2019). Therefore, reduced expression of both of
these cytokines in combined GCR irradiation with HU may be indirectly linked to reduced B cell differen-
tiation. In line with this, both GCR irradiation groups displayed a signiﬁcant reduction in Th cells compared
to NL-Sham controls (Figures 4B and 4D). Although distinct effector T cell proﬁles, including Tfh, were not
thoroughly characterized, Tfh effector cell lineage would have been included in these overall Th cell pop-
ulations. Additionally, CD20 surface molecule expression on B cells is reduced during B cell maturation into
plasma cells (Robillard et al., 2014; Styles et al., 2017). However, we did not see any difference in cell surface
expression of CD20 MFI (Figure 3C), suggesting B cell differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells
may be impaired in GCR and SPE irradiation groups, compared to NL-Sham controls. As B cell numbers are
reduced (with no difference in CD20 surface expression) within GCR and SPE in combination with HU
groups, there is a lower pool of antibody-production vehicles essential for effective humoral immunity.
miRNA GO immune terms displayed reduced B cell differentiation and homeostasis in SPE irradiation
and gamma irradiation, compared with HU-Sham controls, but was no different with GCR irradiation
groups (Figure 7A), further suggesting distinct immune-related pathways are regulated following deep
space simulations. Of interest, robust gene expression of Il-4 (Figure 6E), which is produced by Th2 and
Tfh cells, directly promotes B cell maturation to plasma cells and ultimately the release of antibodies. There-
fore, although initial B cell populations are reduced, functional output may be compensated for via robust
expression of Il-4. LEO spaceﬂight missions have described minimal differences in B cell numbers and anti-
body production of IgG or IgM; however, IgA levels in ﬂight were signiﬁcantly upregulated compared with
ground controls (Spielmann et al., 2019). This effect may be explained by the general effects of circulating
miRNAs, as humoral immunity is predicted to be elevated by miRNAs (Danger et al., 2014; O’Connell et al.,
2010). In our study, general upregulation of humoral responses are shown, yet multiple miRNA GO terms
revealed that the humoral immune responses mediated by circulating Igs and B cells were suppressed with
GCR combined with HU, compared to HU-Sham controls, further supporting humoral immunity may be
dysregulated following deep space simulations (Figure 7A). Future studies addressing the level of Ig anti-
bodies, B cell/plasma cell distribution, and circulating miRNAs involved during deep space missions would
provide further insight into mechanisms involved in humoral immunity.
A principal ﬁnding in our study was reduced expression of Th and Tc cells, compared to NL-Sham controls.
As main components of the adaptive immune system, both Th and Tc cells provide the advantage of immu-
nological memory and assist with humoral immunity, which are important to prevent recurrent infections
and tumor development. This becomes particularly important during long-duration missions, where
medial intervention is limited. Indeed, infectious agents such as herpes simplex virus reactivate during
LEO spaceﬂight and are dependent on impaired cytotoxic T cells (Mehta et al., 2017; Nash, 2000). Further-
more, previous reports have indicated ionizing irradiation activates T cells (Schaue and McBride, 2012).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
13
iScience
Article

However, the overall effect of ionizing irradiation on lymphocyte outcomes (i.e., activation or apoptosis)
depends on multiple factors, most notably the dose and dose schedule (MacLennan and Kay, 1978; Schaue
and McBride, 2012). For instance, preconditioning mice, i.e., irradiation for graft transplantation, relies on
lethal bone marrow irradiation doses and fractionations to reduce lymphocyte counts (Bagley et al., 2002).
In our study, GCR irradiation caused extensive reduction in both Th and Tc cells, compared with SPE or
gamma irradiation (Figures 4B–4E), indicating GCR irradiation produced more damaging effects on these
cell types. Inhomogeneous dose depth between charged particles (GCR, SPE) and photon (gamma) tracks
may be involved in this effect, as gamma irradiation exposure groups did not signiﬁcantly affect Th or Tc
numbers, compared with SPE and GCR irradiation groups. Thus, GCR and SPE irradiation may target
deeper immune tissues, such as lymph nodes, where the majority of T naive and circulating T effector cells
reside when not trafﬁcking in the bloodstream (Hunter et al., 2016). The radiosensitivity of lymphocytes is
dependent on the speed of DNA repair mechanisms relative to division, as non-proliferating cells are more
radioresistant (Schaue and McBride, 2012). Radioresistance is observed in non-dividing cells as these cells
are in G0 stage, during which DNA is compact and stable, protein-protected heterochromatin (Falk et al.,
2008; Karagiannis et al., 2007). Proliferating lymphocytes, on the other hand, have exited the G0 stage and
are in the DNA synthesis phase, which makes them more vulnerable to irradiation damage (Falk et al., 2008;
Karagiannis et al., 2007). Cellular division requires correct, undamaged DNA to be copied to their progeny,
and if repair mechanisms are not fast enough, elevated apoptosis results (Niemantsverdriet et al., 2012).
Indeed, miRNA Hallmark terms for DNA repair are upregulated, indicating after exposure to deep space
simulations, circulating miRNAs are involved in DNA repair machinery, whereby DNA damage has occurred
(Figure 7B). Although we did not measure apoptosis directly, miRNA Hallmark terms also identiﬁed select
apoptosis pathways were engaged during GCR irradiation exposures, compared to HU-Sham controls
(Figure 7B), suggesting elevated DNA damage may be beyond repair, leading to apoptosis, following
GCR irradiation conditions.
We further assessed lymphocyte surface receptor expression of IL-7R. As described above, IL-7R is ex-
pressed on naive T cells, but not activated T cells, and then is re-expressed on memory T cells (Mazzucchelli
and Durum, 2007). Indeed, IL-7R MFI was reduced in GCR irradiation combined with HU, compared to NL-
Sham controls, suggesting T cell activation (Figure 5C). In line with this, Il7R knockout mice have signiﬁcantly
reduced developmental T and B cells, and are similar phenotypically as SCID mice, which are immunocom-
promised (Peschon et al., 1994). This may somewhat explain overall reduced lymphocyte populations
following simulated spaceﬂight exposures, along with reduced thymic and splenic weights, as well. Interest-
ingly, miR-199a and miR-142–3p target Il7R (Luo and Fu, 2018), reducing its expression levels; however, in
our report, mechanisms of this requires further investigation. Conversely, elevated IL-7R has been linked to
multiple inﬂammatory diseases (Anderson et al., 2011; Belarif et al., 2018; Willis et al., 2012). For example,
blocking IL-7R inhibited JAK/STAT, ERK, and PI3K signaling of IFN-g from memory cytotoxic T cells, limiting
chronic inﬂammation (Belarif et al., 2018). In line with this, miRNA Hallmark terms displayed general reduc-
tion of PI3K/AKT signaling and inﬂammatory response pathways across all simulated deep space expo-
sures, indicating miRNA involvement in suppression of these pathways (Figure 7B). Alternatively, HU-
Sham groups had elevated IL-7R MFI, which suggests elevated inﬂammation. Indeed, miRNA Hallmark
terms displayed elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) across all exposure groups, and HU-Sham controls
displayed heightened ROS expression levels (Figure 7B). Heightened ROS can cause inﬂammation both in
spaceﬂight and on Earth (Crucian et al., 2018; Garrett-Bakelman et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2017), which may
be an associated mechanism involved during heightened inﬂammation in the HU-Sham groups. Therefore,
IL-7R, along with neutrophil counts (Figure 2C), NLR (Figure 5E), Il-6 expression (Figure 6C), and ROS Hall-
mark terms regulated by miRNAs (Figure 7B) are all elevated in HU-Sham mice, further supporting inﬂam-
matory outcomes following prolonged microgravity. In line with this, ISS LEO crew member data displayed
inﬂammation via elevated IL-1b and IL-1a compared with pre-ﬂight controls (Figure 8, Table S1). Impor-
tantly, these molecules were induced early (day 15) during spaceﬂight, whereby the effects of ionizing irra-
diation exposures would have been minimal (Figure 8, Table S1), conﬁrming inﬂammation is induced in LEO
astronauts, similar to our ground HU model.
Lymphopenia, or reduced T and B cell counts, poses a problem for adequate immunological protection
against challenges (Schaue and McBride, 2012). Furthermore, lymphopenia recovery results in immune
proﬁling changes that may be either detrimental or helpful to the host. In this report, compared to NL-
Sham controls, robust induction of Il-4 following all ionizing irradiation groups combined with HU was
noted. IL-4 is typically associated with Th2 effector cells, which are chieﬂy involved in allergic inﬂammation,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

including asthma, chronic rhinosinusitis, atopic dermatitis, and eosinophilic gastrointestinal inﬂammatory
disease (Nakayama et al., 2017). Interestingly, during spaceﬂight astronauts experience elevated allergic-
like symptoms including rashes (Dunn et al., 2018) and hypersensitivity episodes (Voorhies et al., 2019).
Therefore, Th2 immunity may be the principal immune response generated during deep space exposures;
however, further evaluation of the type of Th cell subtypes produced in response to simulated deep space
exposures are necessary.
Deep spaceﬂight exposures present immunologically complicated outcomes. Synergistic inﬂammatory or
immunogenic responses were variable in some, but not all, measurements, and in some cases were non-
productive. Furthermore, circulating miRNAs (cell-to-cell transfer via exosomes) (Montagner et al., 2013;
Schwarzenbach and Gahan, 2019) contribute to unique immune proﬁles, therefore miRNAs may be impor-
tant for immune-targeted therapies. Although not studied in this report, added complexities involving
combined types of ionizing irradiation, as well as protracted versus acute irradiation exposures that would
also be experienced during deep spaceﬂight, are necessary to consider in future studies. Furthermore,
only a small snippet into the immune response was assessed in this study; therefore, longitudinal re-
sponses and functional consequences are also required in future studies. Nonetheless, we found distinct
immune proﬁles and miRNA signatures are produced by each irradiation exposure group, singly or in
combination with HU in mice. Therefore, selective countermeasures targeting distinct immune responses
in crew members may be required during long-duration exploratory missions to the lunar surface and
Mars.
Limitations of the Study
In this study, we report the immune and miRNA differentials of mice following ground-based simulations
of deep spaceﬂight, along with analyses of crew member inﬂammation in LEO. As this study utilized
ground-based simulations in mice, deep spaceﬂight comparisons would be required to conﬁrm similar
proﬁles. Additionally, interpretation of whole-blood transcriptomics to speciﬁc cell types is limited in
this study; however, these data provide insight into the overall cytokine proﬁle induced by each condi-
tion that is independent of cell frequency. Furthermore, the contribution of miRNAs to the generated
immune populations is described; however, an understanding into mechanism and/or functional out-
comes would fully elucidate their role to overall immunity. In addition, the time point of collections
was at an immediate response, yet the long-term response would also be of beneﬁt, in particular, for
long-duration missions. Finally, the comparisons between the immune differentials in mice and humans
is a limitation; however, this study can give some insight into the signiﬁcant immune population changes
(i.e., T cytotoxic lymphocytes) that can be studied in humans during deep spaceﬂight mission in the near
future.
Resource Availability
Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the Lead Contact, Af-
shin Beheshti, PhD (afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov).
Materials Availability
This study did not generate any unique reagents.
Data and Code Availability
The plasma miRNA-seq raw fastq ﬁles can be found on Database: NASA’s GeneLab data repository/plat-
form (https://genelab.nasa.gov/). The accession number for the miRNA-seq data reported in this paper is
GeneLab: with the following identiﬁers: GLDS-336, https://doi.org/10.26030/qasa-rr29.
METHODS
All methods can be found in the accompanying Transparent Methods supplemental ﬁle.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101747.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
15
iScience
Article

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Drs. Peter Guida, Adam Rusek, and Michael Sivertz and the NSRL team at BNL for
their assistance and expertise with irradiation studies. This work is supported by the Translational Research
Institute for Space Health through NASA Cooperative Agreement NNX16AO69A (T-0404) awarded to A.B.
and by the Universities Space Research Association (USRA) and NASA Space Biology Program post-
doctoral fellowship to A.M.P. The astronaut data were provided by the Nutritional Status Assessment, Di-
etary Intake Can Predict and Protect Against Changes in Bone Metabolism During Space Flight and Recov-
ery (Pro K), and the Biochemical Proﬁle projects (PI: Smith and Zwart), which were supported by the NASA
Human Research Program’s Human Health Countermeasure Element. We thank the Nutritional Biochem-
istry Lab for their efforts in making these projects successful.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, A.M.P.; Methodology, E.A.B., M.C.-C., and A.B.; Formal Analysis, A.M.P. A.B., and S.A.;
Investigation, A.M.P., E.A.B, M.C.-C., and A.B.; Resources, A.M.P., E.A.B, M.C.-C., R.M., and A.B.; Data Cu-
ration, A.M.P., E.A.B, M.C.-C., S.M.S., and A.B., Writing – Original draft, A.M.P.; Writing – Review & Editing,
A.M.P., E.A.B., S.A., S.B., R.M., P.G., S.M.S., B.E.C., S.R.Z., and A.B.; Visualization, A.M.P. and A.B.; Super-
vision, A.B.; Project Administration, A.M.P., E.A.B, M.C.-C., and A.B.; and Funding Acquisition, A.M.P. and
A.B.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
All authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 15, 2020
Revised: October 16, 2020
Accepted: October 26, 2020
Published: November 25, 2020
REFERENCES
Anderson, C.A., Boucher, G., Lees, C.W., Franke,
A., D’Amato, M., Taylor, K.D., Lee, J.C., Goyette,
P., Imielinski, M., Latiano, A., et al. (2011). Meta-
analysis identiﬁes 29 additional ulcerative colitis
risk loci, increasing the number of conﬁrmed
associations to 47. Nat. Genet. 43, 246–252.
Asensi, V., Valle, E., Meana, A., Fierer, J., Celada,
A., Alvarez, V., Paz, J., Coto, E., Carton, J.A.,
Maradona, J.A., et al. (2004). In vivo interleukin-6
protects neutrophils from apoptosis in
osteomyelitis. Infect Immun. 72, 3823–3828.
Bagley, J., Tian, C., Sachs, D.H., and Iacomini, J.
(2002). T cells mediate resistance to genetically
modiﬁed bone marrow in lethally irradiated
recipients. Transplantation 74, 1454–1460.
Baker, J.R., Vuppusetty, C., Colley, T., Hassibi, S.,
Fenwick, P.S., Donnelly, L.E., Ito, K., and Barnes,
P.J. (2019). MicroRNA-570 is a novel regulator of
cellular senescence and inﬂammaging. FASEB J.
33, 1605–1616.
Baselet, B., Sonveaux, P., Baatout, S., and Aerts,
A. (2019). Pathological effects of ionizing
radiation: endothelial activation and dysfunction.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 76, 699–728.
Beheshti, A., Ray, S., Fogle, H., Berrios, D., and
Costes, S.V. (2018). A microRNA signature and
TGF-b1 response were identiﬁed as the key
master regulators for spaceﬂight response. PLoS
One 13, e0199621.
Beheshti, A., Stevenson, K., Vanderburg, C., Ravi,
D., McDonald, J.T., Christie, A.L., Shigemori, K.,
Jester, H., Weinstock, D.M., and Evens, A.M.
(2019). Identiﬁcation of circulating serum
Multi-MicroRNA signatures in human DLBCL
models. Sci. Rep. 9, 17161.
Beheshti, A., Vanderburg, C., McDonald, J.T.,
Ramkumar, C., Kadungure, T., Zhang, H.,
Gartenhaus, R.B., and Evens, A.M. (2017). A
circulating microRNA signature predicts age-
based development of lymphoma. PLoS One 12,
e0170521.
Belarif, L., Mary, C., Jacquemont, L., Mai, H.L.,
Danger, R., Hervouet, J., Minault, D., Thepenier,
V., Nerrie` re-Daguin, V., Nguyen, E., et al. (2018).
IL-7 receptor blockade blunts antigen-speciﬁc
memory T cell responses and chronic
inﬂammation in primates. Nat. Commun. 9, 4483.
Buchheim, J.I., Matzel, S., Rykova, M., Vassilieva,
G., Ponomarev, S., Nichiporuk, I., Ho¨ rl, M., Moser,
D., Biere, K., Feuerecker, M., et al. (2019). Stress
related shift toward inﬂammaging in cosmonauts
after long-duration space ﬂight. Front. Physiol.
10, 85.
Cavey, T., Pierre, N., Nay, K., Allain, C., Ropert,
M., Lore´ al, O., and Derbre´ , F. (2017). Simulated
microgravity decreases circulating iron in rats:
role of inﬂammation-induced hepcidin
upregulation. Exp. Physiol. 102, 291–298.
Cekanaviciute, E., Rosi, S., and Costes, S.V. (2018).
Central nervous system responses to simulated
galactic cosmic rays. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19, 3669.
Cervantes, J.L., and Hong, B.Y. (2016). Dysbiosis
and immune dysregulation in outer space. Int.
Rev. Immunol. 35, 67–82.
Chancellor, J.C., Blue, R.S., Cengel, K.A., Aun˜ o´ n-
Chancellor, S.M., Rubins, K.H., Katzgraber, H.G.,
and Kennedy, A.R. (2018). Limitations in
predicting the space radiation health risk for
exploration astronauts. NPJ Microgravity 4, 8.
Colonna, M. (2018). Innate lymphoid cells:
diversity, plasticity, and unique functions in
immunity. Immunity 48, 1104–1117.
Crotty, S. (2014). T follicular helper cell
differentiation, function, and roles in disease.
Immunity 41, 529–542.
Crucian, B., Stowe, R.P., Mehta, S., Quiriarte, H.,
Pierson, D., and Sams, C. (2015). Alterations in
adaptive immunity persist during long-duration
spaceﬂight. NPJ Microgravity 1, 15013.
Crucian, B.E., Chouker, A., Simpson, R.J., Mehta,
S., Marshall, G., Smith, S.M., Zwart, S.R., Heer, M.,
Ponomarev, S., Whitmire, A., et al. (2018).
Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight:
potential countermeasures for deep space
exploration missions. Front. Immunol. 9, 1437.
Crucian, B.E., Zwart, S.R., Mehta, S., Uchakin, P.,
Quiriarte, H.D., Pierson, D., Sams, C.F., and
Smith, S.M. (2014). Plasma cytokine
concentrations indicate that in vivo hormonal
regulation of immunity is altered during long-
duration spaceﬂight. J. Interferon Cytokine Res.
34, 778–786.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

Danger, R., Braza, F., Giral, M., Soulillou, J.P., and
Brouard, S. (2014). MicroRNAs, major players in B
cells homeostasis and function. Front. Immunol.
5, 98.
Dienz, O., Eaton, S.M., Bond, J.P., Neveu, W.,
Moquin, D., Noubade, R., Briso, E.M., Charland,
C., Leonard, W.J., Ciliberto, G., et al. (2009). The
induction of antibody production by IL-6 is
indirectly mediated by IL-21 produced by CD4+
T cells. J. Exp. Med. 206, 69–78.
Douda, D.N., Khan, M.A., Grasemann, H., and
Palaniyar, N. (2015). SK3 channel and
mitochondrial ROS mediate NADPH oxidase-
independent NETosis induced by calcium inﬂux.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 112, 2817–2822.
Dumont, N., Bouchard, P., and Frenette, J. (2008).
Neutrophil-induced skeletal muscle damage: a
calculated and controlled response following
hindlimb unloading and reloading. Am. J.
Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 295, R1831–
R1838.
Dumont, N., Lepage, K., Coˆ te´ , C.H., and
Frenette, J. (2007). Mast cells can modulate
leukocyte accumulation and skeletal muscle
function following hindlimb unloading. J. Appl.
Phys. 103, 97–104.
Dunn, C., Boyd, M., and Orengo, I. (2018).
Dermatologic manifestations in spaceﬂight: a
review. Dermatol. Online J. 24, 1–8.
Falk, M., Luka´sova´, E., and Kozubek, S. (2008).
Chromatin structure inﬂuences the sensitivity of
DNA to gamma-radiation. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1783, 2398–2414.
Fernandez-Gonzalo, R., Baatout, S., and Moreels,
M. (2017). Impact of particle irradiation on the
immune system: from the clinic to Mars. Front.
Immunol. 8, 177.
Ferreira, J.A., Crissey, J.M., and Brown, M. (2011).
An alternant method to the traditional NASA
hindlimb unloading model in mice. J. Vis. Exp. 49,
2467.
Frenette, J., St-Pierre, M., Coˆ te´ , C.H., Mylona, E.,
and Pizza, F.X. (2002). Muscle impairment occurs
rapidly and precedes inﬂammatory cell
accumulation after mechanical loading. Am. J.
Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 282, R351–
R357.
Garrett-Bakelman, F.E., Darshi, M., Green, S.J.,
Gur, R.C., Lin, L., Macias, B.R., McKenna, M.J.,
Meydan, C., Mishra, T., Nasrini, J., et al. (2019).
The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional
analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight.
Science 364, eaau8650.
Grabham, P., Sharma, P., Bigelow, A., and Geard,
C. (2013). Two distinct types of the inhibition of
vasculogenesis by different species of charged
particles. Vasc. Cell 5, 16.
Gridley, D.S., and Pecaut, M.J. (2006). Whole-
body irradiation and long-term modiﬁcation of
bone marrow-derived cell populations by low-
and high-LET radiation. Vivo 20, 781–789.
Gridley, D.S., and Pecaut, M.J. (2011). Genetic
background and lymphocyte populations after
total-body exposure to iron ion radiation. Int. J.
Radiat. Biol. 87, 8–23.
Gridley, D.S., Pecaut, M.J., and Nelson, G.A.
(2002). Total-body irradiation with high-LET
particles: acute and chronic effects on the
immune system. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr.
Comp. Physiol. 282, R677–R688.
Hu, S. (2017). Solar particle events and radiation
exposure in space. In NASA Space Radiation
Program Element, THREE Editorial Board., ed.
(NASA Space Radiation Program Element,
Human Research Program), pp. 1–15.
Hunter, M.C., Teijeira, A., and Halin, C. (2016). T
cell trafﬁcking through lymphatic vessels. Front.
Immunol. 7, 613.
Isaac, V., Wu, C.Y., Huang, C.T., Baune, B.T.,
Tseng, C.L., and McLachlan, C.S. (2016). Elevated
neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio predicts mortality
in medical inpatients with multiple chronic
conditions. Medicine (Baltimore) 95, e3832.
Kak, G., Raza, M., and Tiwari, B.K. (2018).
Interferon-gamma (IFN-ɣ): exploring its
implications in infectious diseases. Biomol.
Concepts 9, 64–79.
Karagiannis, T.C., Harikrishnan, K.N., Kn, H., and
El-Osta, A. (2007). Disparity of histone
deacetylase inhibition on repair of radiation-
induced DNA damage on euchromatin and
constitutive heterochromatin compartments.
Oncogene 26, 3963–3971.
Keegan, A.D., and Zamorano, J. (1998).
Regulation of gene expression, growth, and cell
survival by IL-4: contribution of multiple signaling
pathways. Cell Res. 8, 1–13.
Koenderman, L. (2019). Inside-out control of fc-
receptors. Front. Immunol. 10, 544.
Leliefeld, P.H., Wessels, C.M., Leenen, L.P.,
Koenderman, L., and Pillay, J. (2016). The role of
neutrophils in immune dysfunction during severe
inﬂammation. Crit. Care 20, 73.
Li, M., Holmes, V., Zhou, Y., Ni, H., Sanzari, J.K.,
Kennedy, A.R., and Weissman, D. (2014).
Hindlimb suspension and SPE-like radiation
impairs clearance of bacterial infections. PLoS
One 9, e85665.
Li, P., Shi, J., Zhang, P., Wang, K., Li, J., Liu, H.,
Zhou, Y., Xu, X., Hao, J., Sun, X., et al. (2015).
Simulated microgravity disrupts intestinal
homeostasis and increases colitis susceptibility.
FASEB J. 29, 3263–3273.
Liberzon, A., Birger, C., Thorvaldsdo´ ttir, H.,
Ghandi, M., Mesirov, J.P., and Tamayo, P. (2015).
The Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB)
hallmark gene set collection. Cell Systems 1,
417–425.
Luo, D., and Fu, J. (2018). Identifying
characteristic miRNAs-genes and risk pathways of
multiple sclerosis based on bioinformatics
analysis. Oncotarget 9, 5287–5300.
Lusty, E., Poznanski, S.M., Kwoﬁe, K., Mandur,
T.S., Lee, D.A., Richards, C.D., and Ashkar, A.A.
(2017). IL-18/IL-15/IL-12 synergy induces elevated
and prolonged IFN-g production by ex vivo
expanded NK cells which is not due to enhanced
STAT4 activation. Mol. Immunol. 88, 138–147.
MacLennan, I.C., and Kay, H.E. (1978). Analysis of
treatment in childhood leukemia. IV. The critical
association between dose fractionation and
immunosuppression induced by cranial
irradiation. Cancer 41, 108–111.
Martinez, E.M., Yoshida, M.C., Candelario, T.L.,
and Hughes-Fulford, M. (2015). Spaceﬂight and
simulated microgravity cause a signiﬁcant
reduction of key gene expression in early T-cell
activation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp.
Physiol. 308, R480–R488.
Mazzucchelli, R., and Durum, S.K. (2007).
Interleukin-7 receptor expression: intelligent
design. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 144–154.
Mehta, A., and Baltimore, D. (2016). MicroRNAs
as regulatory elements in immune system logic.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 279–294.
Mehta, S.K., Laudenslager, M.L., Stowe, R.P.,
Crucian, B.E., Feiveson, A.H., Sams, C.F., and
Pierson, D.L. (2017). Latent virus reactivation in
astronauts on the international space station. NPJ
Microgravity 3, 11.
Miller, J. (2020). Radiation Data for GLDS Studies
on the International Space Station (NASA
GeneLab).
Montagner, S., Orlandi, E.M., Merante, S., and
Monticelli, S. (2013). The role of miRNAs in mast
cells and other innate immune cells. Immunol.
Rev. 253, 12–24.
Mortaz, E., Alipoor, S.D., Adcock, I.M., Mumby,
S., and Koenderman, L. (2018). Update on
neutrophil function in severe inﬂammation. Front.
Immunol. 9, 2171.
Nakayama, T., Hirahara, K., Onodera, A., Endo,
Y., Hosokawa, H., Shinoda, K., Tumes, D.J., and
Okamoto, Y. (2017). Th2 cells in health and
disease. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 35, 53–84.
Narici, L., Rizzo, A., Berrilli, F., and Del Moro, D.
(2018). Extreme Events in Geospace - Origins,
Predictability, and Consequences (Elsevier).
Nash, A.A. (2000). T cells and the regulation of
herpes simplex virus latency and reactivation.
J. Exp. Med. 191, 1455–1458.
Nelson, G.A. (2016). Space radiation and human
exposures, A primer. Radiat. Res. 185, 349–358.
Nguyen, G.T., Green, E.R., and Mecsas, J. (2017).
Neutrophils to the ROScue: mechanisms of
NADPH oxidase activation and bacterial
resistance. Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 7, 373.
Niemantsverdriet, M., van Goethem, M.J., Bron,
R., Hogewerf, W., Brandenburg, S., Langendijk,
J.A., van Luijk, P., and Coppes, R.P. (2012). High
and low LET radiation differentially induce normal
tissue damage signals. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol.
Phys. 83, 1291–1297.
O’Brien, J., Hayder, H., Zayed, Y., and Peng, C.
(2018). Overview of MicroRNA biogenesis,
mechanisms of actions, and circulation. Front.
Endocrinol. (Lausanne) 9, 402.
O’Connell, R.M., Rao, D.S., Chaudhuri, A.A., and
Baltimore, D. (2010). Physiological and
pathological roles for microRNAs in the immune
system. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 10, 111–122.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
17
iScience
Article

Ong, S., Rose, N.R., and Ciha´kova´, D. (2017).
Natural killer cells in inﬂammatory heart disease.
Clin. Immunol. 175, 26–33.
Paul, A.M., Mhatre, S.D., Cekanaviciute, E.,
Schreurs, A.-S., Tahimic, C.G.T., Globus, R.K.,
Anand, S., Crucian, B.E., and Bhattacharya, S.
(2020). Neutrophil-to-Lymphocyte Ratio: A
Biomarker to Monitor the Immune Status of
Astronauts. Front. Immunol. 11, 564950.
Pecaut, M.J., Mao, X.W., Bellinger, D.L.,
Jonscher, K.R., Stodieck, L.S., Ferguson, V.L.,
Bateman, T.A., Mohney, R.P., and Gridley, D.S.
(2017). Is spaceﬂight-induced immune
dysfunction linked to systemic changes in
metabolism? PLoS One 12, e0174174.
Peschon, J.J., Morrissey, P.J., Grabstein, K.H.,
Ramsdell, F.J., Maraskovsky, E., Gliniak, B.C.,
Park, L.S., Ziegler, S.F., Williams, D.E., Ware, C.B.,
et al. (1994). Early lymphocyte expansion is
severely impaired in interleukin 7 receptor-
deﬁcient mice. J. Exp. Med. 180, 1955–1960.
Puukila, S., Lemon, J.A., Lees, S.J., Tai, T.C.,
Boreham, D.R., and Khaper, N. (2017). Impact of
ionizing radiation on the cardiovascular system: a
review. Radiat. Res. 188, 539–546.
Rathinam, V.A., and Fitzgerald, K.A. (2016).
Inﬂammasome complexes: emerging
mechanisms and effector functions. Cell 165,
792–800.
Ritvo, P.G., and Klatzmann, D. (2019). Interleukin-
1 in the response of follicular helper and follicular
regulatory T cells. Front. Immunol. 10, 250.
Robillard, N., Wuille` me, S., Moreau, P., and Be´ ne´ ,
M.C. (2014). Immunophenotype of normal and
myelomatous plasma-cell subsets. Front.
Immunol. 5, 137.
Romero-Weaver, A.L., Wan, X.S., Diffenderfer,
E.S., Lin, L., and Kennedy, A.R. (2013). Effect of
SPE-like proton or photon radiation on the
kinetics of mouse peripheral blood cells and
radiation biological effectiveness determinations.
Astrobiology 13, 570–577.
Saha, J., Wilson, P., Thieberger, P., Lowenstein,
D., Wang, M., and Cucinotta, F.A. (2014).
Biological characterization of low-energy ions
with high-energy deposition on human cells.
Radiat. Res. 182, 282–291.
Sanzari, J.K., Diffenderfer, E.S., Hagan, S.,
Billings, P.C., Gridley, D.S., Seykora, J.T.,
Kennedy, A.R., and Cengel, K.A. (2015).
Dermatopathology effects of simulated solar
particle event radiation exposure in the porcine
model. Life Sci. Space Res. (Amst) 6, 21–28.
Sanzari, J.K., Wan, X.S., Krigsfeld, G.S., Wroe,
A.J., Gridley, D.S., and Kennedy, A.R. (2013). The
effects of gamma and proton radiation exposure
on hematopoietic cell counts in the ferret model.
Gravit. Space Res. 1, 79–94.
Schaue, D., and McBride, W.H. (2012). T
lymphocytes and normal tissue responses to
radiation. Front. Oncol. 2, 119.
Schwarzenbach, H., and Gahan, P.B. (2019).
MicroRNA shuttle from cell-to-cell by exosomes
and its impact in cancer. Noncoding RNA 5, 28.
Simonsen, L.C., Slaba, T.C., Guida, P., and Rusek,
A. (2020). NASA’s ﬁrst ground-based Galactic
Cosmic Ray Simulator: enabling a new era in
space radiobiology research. PLoS Biol. 18,
e3000669.
Smith, C.L., and Eppig, J.T. (2009). The
mammalian phenotype ontology: enabling
robust annotation and comparative analysis.
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Syst. Biol. Med. 1, 390–399.
Smith, S.M., Heer, M., Shackelford, L.C., Sibonga,
J.D., Spatz, J., Pietrzyk, R.A., Hudson, E.K., and
Zwart, S.R. (2015). Bone metabolism and renal
stone risk during International Space Station
missions. Bone 81, 712–720.
Spielmann, G., Agha, N., Kunz, H., Simpson, R.J.,
Crucian, B., Mehta, S., Laughlin, M., and
Campbell, J. (2019). B cell homeostasis is
maintained during long-duration spaceﬂight.
J. Appl. Phys. 126, 469–476.
Sridharan, D.M., Chien, L.C., Cucinotta, F.A., and
Pluth, J.M. (2020). Comparison of signaling
proﬁles in the low dose range following low and
high LET radiation. Life Sci. Space Res. (Amst) 25,
28–41.
Styles, C.T., Bazot, Q., Parker, G.A., White, R.E.,
Paschos, K., and Allday, M.J. (2017). EBV
epigenetically suppresses the B cell-to-plasma
cell differentiation pathway while establishing
long-term latency. PLoS Biol. 15, e2001992.
Se´ gue´ la, P.E., Iriart, X., Acar, P., Montaudon, M.,
Roudaut, R., and Thambo, J.B. (2015).
Eosinophilic cardiac disease: molecular, clinical
and imaging aspects. Arch. Cardiovasc. Dis. 108,
258–268.
Tahimic, C.G.T., Paul, A.M., Schreurs, A.S., Torres,
S.M., Rubinstein, L., Steczina, S., Lowe, M.,
Bhattacharya, S., Alwood, J.S., Ronca, A.E., et al.
(2019). Inﬂuence of social isolation during
prolonged simulated weightlessness by hindlimb
unloading. Front. Physiol. 10, 1147.
Tanaka, T., Narazaki, M., and Kishimoto, T. (2014).
IL-6 in inﬂammation, immunity, and disease. Cold
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6, a016295.
Teresa Pinto, A., Laranjeiro Pinto, M., Patrı´cia
Cardoso, A., Monteiro, C., Teixeira Pinto, M.,
Filipe Maia, A., Castro, P., Figueira, R., Monteiro,
A., Marques, M., et al. (2016). Ionizing radiation
modulates human macrophages towards a pro-
inﬂammatory phenotype preserving their pro-
invasive and pro-angiogenic capacities. Sci. Rep.
6, 18765.
Tsitsiou, E., and Lindsay, M.A. (2009). microRNAs
and the immune response. Curr. Opin.
Pharmacol. 9, 514–520.
van Rooij, E., and Kauppinen, S. (2014).
Development of microRNA therapeutics is
coming of age. EMBO Mol. Med. 6, 851–864.
Voorhies, A.A., Mark Ott, C., Mehta, S., Pierson,
D.L., Crucian, B.E., Feiveson, A., Oubre, C.M.,
Torralba, M., Moncera, K., Zhang, Y., et al. (2019).
Study of the impact of long-duration space
missions at the International Space Station on the
astronaut microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 9911.
Wei, L.X., Zhou, J.N., Roberts, A.I., and Shi, Y.F.
(2003). Lymphocyte reduction induced by
hindlimb unloading: distinct mechanisms in the
spleen and thymus. Cell Res. 13, 465–471.
Willis, C.R., Seamons, A., Maxwell, J., Treuting,
P.M., Nelson, L., Chen, G., Phelps, S., Smith, C.L.,
Brabb, T., Iritani, B.M., et al. (2012). Interleukin-7
receptor blockade suppresses adaptive and
innate inﬂammatory responses in experimental
colitis. J. Inﬂamm. (Lond) 9, 39.
Wu, H., Huff, J.L., Casey, R., Kim, M.-H., and
Cucinotta, F.A. (2009). Risk of Acute Radiation
Syndromes Due to Solar Particle Events (NASA
Space Radiation Program Element, Human
Research Program).
Zhang, R., Ran, H.H., Gao, Y.L., Ma, J., Huang, Y.,
Bai, Y.G., and Lin, L.J. (2010). Differential vascular
cell adhesion molecule-1 expression and
superoxide production in simulated microgravity
rat vasculature. EXCLI J. 9, 195–204.
Zhang, R., Ran, H.H., Peng, L., Xu, F., Sun, J.F.,
Zhang, L.N., Fan, Y.Y., and Cui, G. (2014).
Mitochondrial regulation of NADPH oxidase in
hindlimb unweighting rat cerebral arteries. PLoS
One 9, e95916.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
18
iScience 23, 101747, December 18, 2020
iScience
Article

iScience, Volume 23
Supplemental Information
Beyond Low-Earth Orbit: Characterizing
Immune and microRNA Differentials following
Simulated Deep Spaceﬂight Conditions in Mice
Amber
M.
Paul,
Margareth
Cheng-Campbell,
Elizabeth
A.
Blaber,
Sulekha
Anand, Sharmila Bhattacharya, Sara R. Zwart, Brian E. Crucian, Scott M. Smith, Robert
Meller, Peter Grabham, and Afshin Beheshti

 
Supplemental Information 
 
 
Figure S1. Lymphocyte differentials reveal changes in absolute counts following deep space exposures. 
Absolute counts of neutrophils (Ly6ghighCD11b+/CD45+) (A), monocytes (Ly6glowCD11b+/CD45+) (B), 
eosinophils (Ly6g-CD11b+/CD45+) (C), NK and NKT cells (CD20-NK1.1+/CD45+) (D), B cells (CD20+NK1.1-
/CD45+) (E) and total lymphocytes (SSC-A vs. CD45+) (F) are displayed within total leukocyte populations. 
(C) Median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of cell surface expression of CD20 on all CD45+ cells. (D) Percent 
(%) of NK/NKT cells (NK1.1+CD20-/CD45+). Bar graph data represents means ±SEM (p < 0.05, n = 7-10 
per group). Statistical tests and labels are the same as Figure 1. 
 

 
Figure S2. Upset plot displays general up- and down-regulated immune pathways. Gene ontology 
(GO) terms with an FDR < 0.05 cutoff were considered significant. Specific immune-related GO terms were 
mapped to the GO Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) and were plotted with R packages. Upset plot of 
biological and molecular immune pathways engaged following high and low LET IR exposure, singly or in 
combination with HU.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Analyte/ 
Blood 
L-45 ‡ 
L-45  
(on gel) 
FD15 
 
FD30 
 
FD60 
 
FD120 
 
FD180 
 
R+0 
 
R+30 
IGF-1  
ng/mL 
180.3 
±44.4 
176±42 
220±62 
*** 
216±
52 
*** 
219 
±53 
*** 
215 
±51 
*** 
219 
±50 
*** 
202 
±60 
*** 
164 
±46 
n=40 
n=39 
n=40 
 
n=32 
 
n=40 
 
n=33 
 
n=37 
 
n=40 
 
n=40 
IL-1β  
pg/mL 
1.56±2.17 
n=40 
1.93±2.5 
n=39 
2.48 
±4.0 
n=47 
*** 
1.44 
±2.10 
n=39 
 
2.17 
±3.11 
n=47 
*** 
1.87 
±2.98 
n=39 
 
2.51 
±3.52 
n=38 
*** 
1.41 
±1.80 
n=47 
 
1.49 
±1.88 
n=46 
IL-1α 
pg/mL 
4.34 
±8.49 
6.59 
±11.23 
7.54 
±13.43 
*** 
5.44 
±10.1
2 
 
7.86 
±13.87 
*** 
5.27 
±8.59 
 
9.16 
±15.19 
*** 
2.75 
±4.19 
 
3.91 
±6.50 
n=47 
n=42 
n=47 
 
n=39 
 
n=47 
 
n=39 
 
n=38 
 
n=47 
 
n=46 
IL-1RA 
pg/mL 
364±201 
526 
±392 
567 
±366 
*** 
483 
±327 
 
596 
±433 
*** 
600 
±515 
*** 
612 
±384 
*** 
625 
±524 
*** 
484 
±553 
n=44 
n=39 
n=44 
 
n=36 
 
n=44 
 
n=36 
 
n=37 
 
n=44 
 
n=43 
Table S1. Astronaut Physiological data from blood validate inflammation during spaceflight. Data 
are mean ± SD. *** P<0.001 compared to L-45. ‡ The column labelled "L-45 (on gel)" represents data from 
the sample frozen in the tube and stored for batched analysis alongside the flight samples. In most cases, 
this came from the same draw as the L-45 collection. ‡‡ As described in methods, crewmembers on R+0 
are not necessarily fasted prior to blood collection. 
 
 
 

 
Transparent Methods 
 
KEY RESOURCES TABLE 
 
REAGENT or RESOURCE 
SOURCE 
IDENTIFIER 
Antibodies 
Fc Block (CD16/CD32 Monoclonal Antibody (93), 
eBioscience™) 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
14-0161-86 
 
CD45 Monoclonal Antibody (30-F11), FITC, 
eBioscience™) 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
11-0451-85 
 
CD11b Monoclonal Antibody (M1/70), PE-Cyanine7, 
eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
25-0112-82 
 
Ly-6G Monoclonal Antibody (1A8-Ly6g), PE, 
eBioscience™) 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
12-9668-82 
 
NK1.1 Monoclonal Antibody (PK136), APC, 
eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
17-5941-82 
 
CD20 Monoclonal Antibody (AISB12), PE, 
eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
12-0201-82 
 
CD3e Monoclonal Antibody (145-2C11), FITC, 
eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
11-0031-85 
 
CD4 Monoclonal Antibody (GK1.5), PE, eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
12-0041-85 
 
CD8a Monoclonal Antibody (53-6.7), FITC, 
eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
11-0081-85 
 
CD127 (IL-7R)Monoclonal Antibody (A7R34), Alexa 
Fluor 488, eBioscience™ 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
53-1271-82 
 
Biological Samples 
Mouse Blood  
C57BL/6J Wt female 
n/a 
Mouse Plasma 
C57BL/6J Wt female 
n/a 
Mouse Spleen 
C57BL/6J Wt female 
n/a 
Mouse Thymus 
C57BL/6J Wt female 
n/a 
Human Blood (serum, plasma) and Urine 
Male and female 
astronauts 
n/a 
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins 
Paraformaldehyde (16%) 
Fisher Scientific 
AA433689M 
1x Phosphate Buffered Saline (pH 7.4) 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
10010023 
 
eBioscience™ 1x RBC Lysis Buffer 
 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
00-4333-57 
UltraPure™ 0.5M EDTA, pH 8.0 
 
Thermo Fisher 
Scientific 
15575020 
 
Critical Commercial Assays 
miRNeasy Mini Kit 
QIAgen 
217004 
iSCRIPTTM cDNA synthesis kit 
Bio-Rad 
1708890 
iQTM SYBR® Green Supermix 
Bio-Rad 
170-8880 
miRNeasy serum/plasma kit 
QIAgen 
217184 
TruSeq Small RNA Sample Prep Kits 
Illumina 
RS-200-0012 
Deposited Data 
miRNA-sequence mouse plasma dataset 
NASA GeneLab 
(https://genelab.nasa.
gov/) 
GLDS-336, DOI: 
10.26030/qasa-rr29 

 
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains 
C57BL/6J Wt female mice  
Jackson Laboratories 
000664 
Simplified 5-ion GCR Simulation 
Protons at 1000 MeV, 
28Si at 600 MeV/n, 4He 
at 250 MeV/n, 16O at 
350 MeV/n, 56Fe at 
600 MeV/n, and 
protons at 250 MeV 
n/a 
Simulated SPE 
Protons at 50MeV to 
150MeV 
n/a 
Simulated Gamma 
137Cs source (5 Gy) 
n/a 
Oligonucleotides 
Gapdh 
FWD 5’-CAGGAGAGTGTTTCCTCGTCC-3’ 
REV 5’-TTCCCATTCTCGGCCTTGAC-3’ 
IDT 
NM_001289726.1 
Ifn-𝛾 
FWD 5’- AGGAACTGGCAAAAGGATGGT-3’ 
REV 5’-TCATTGAATGCTTGGCGCTG-3’ 
IDT 
NM_008337.4 
  
Il-4 
FWD 5’- CCATATCCACGGATGCGACA-3’ 
REV 5’- AAGCCCGAAAGAGTCTCTGC-3’ 
IDT 
NM_021283.2 
  
 
Il-1β  
FWD 5’- TGCCACCTTTTGACAGTGATG-3’ 
REV 5’- AAGGTCCACGGGAAAGACAC-3’ 
IDT 
NM_008361.4 
 
Tnf-α  
FWD 5’- CCCACGTCGTAGCAAACCA-3’ 
REV 5’- ACAAGGTACAACCCATCGGC-3’ 
IDT 
NM_013693.3 
 
iNos  
FWD 5’- AGGGACTGAGCTGTTAGAGACA-3’ 
REV 5’- GTCATCTTGTATTGTTGGGCTGAG-3’ 
IDT 
NM_010927.4 
 
Il-6 
FWD 5’- GCCTTCTTGGGACTGATGCT-3’ 
REV 5’- TGCCATTGCACAACTCTTTTC-3’ 
IDT 
NM_031168.2 
 
Il-10 
FWD 5’- GGTTGCCAAGCCTTATCGGA-3’ 
REV 5’- GGGGAGAAATCGATGACAGC-3’ 
IDT 
NM_010548.2 
 
Software and Algorithms 
FlowJo Software v10.5.3 
BD 
https://www.flowjo.co
m/ 
Prism v8.4.2 
GraphPad 
https://www.graphpa
d.com/scientific-
software/prism/ 
ACGT101-miR (LC Sciences) 
n/a 
n/a 
miRBase 22.0 
(Kozomara et al., 
2019)  
http://www.mirbase.o
rg/ 
RNAfold software 
n/a 
http://rna.tbi.univie.a
c.at/cgi-
bin/RNAWebSuite/R
NAfold.cgi 
RBiomirGS v0.2.12 R package 
(Zhang and Storey, 
2018) 
https://github.com/jz
hangc/git_RBiomirG
S 

 
GO Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) 
(Smith and Eppig, 
2009) 
http://www.informatic
s.jax.org/ 
R packages UpsetR v1.4.0 
(Conway et al., 2017) 
https://cran.r-
project.org/web/pack
ages/UpSetR/index.
html 
pheatmap v1.0.12 
Kolde Rpheatmap: 
Pretty heatmaps 
software; 2015 
https://cran.r-
project.org/web/pack
ages/pheatmap/inde
x.html 
R package v3.6.1 
n/a 
https://www.r-
project.org/  
Other 
BD FACSMelodyTM 
BD Biosciences 
n/a 
Bioanalyzer 2100 
Agilent 
n/a 
Illumina Hiseq 2500 
LC Sciences 
n/a 
ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR 
Applied Biosystems 
n/a 
 
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS 
 
Ethics Statement 
All experiments were approved by Brookhaven National Laboratory’s (BNL) Institutional Animal Care and 
Use Committee (IACUC) (protocol number: 506) and all experiment were performed by trained personnel 
in AAALAC accredited animal facilities at BNL, while conforming to the U.S. National Institutes of Health 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All human astronaut data were reviewed and approved 
by the NASA Institutional Review Board and all subjects provided written informed consent. 
 
Experimental design  
15-week +/- 3-day old, C57BL/6J wildtype (Wt) female mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories 
and housed at BNL. Upon arrival to BNL, mice were quarantined and acclimated to a standard 12:12h 
light:dark cycle, with controlled temperature/humidity for 1-week prior to cage acclimation. Food and water 
were given ad libitum, and standard bedding was changed once per week. Mice were cage acclimated 
(n=10 mice per group; 2 mice per cage to maintain social interaction) 3-days prior to HU, followed by 14-
days either normally loaded (NL) or hindlimb unloaded (HU, see details below). Irradiation was administered 
on day 13 and blood tissues were collected at 24-hours post-irradiation and post-euthanasia by CO2 
overdose, followed by cervical dislocation. Blood was collected via the abdominal aorta in EDTA-coated 
tubes (0.5 M) and plasma was separated by centrifugation at 2,000xg for 15 minutes. Plasma was collected 
and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen for -80°C storage. A 100 μl aliquot of cellular fraction was flash frozen 
and stored at -80°C for RNA analyses, while the remaining cellular fraction was lysed with 1x RBC lysis 
buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by flow cytometric preparation and analyses, as describe below. 
Body weight tracking was performed on days -3, 0, 7 and 14. The experimental timeline is described in 
Figure 1A. 
 
Hindlimb Unloading 
Hindlimb unloading was performed using the adjusted Morey-Holton method for social housing (n=2 per 
cage) (Tahimic et al., 2019). Briefly, mice were suspended from the tail using non-invasive traction tape 
attached to an adjustable pulley mounted on the top of a standard rodent cage. The adjustable nature of 
the device allows the user to position the animal in a head-down position (approximately 30° to the horizon) 
once attached. The crossbar height, lateral crossbar position, and chain length are adjustable. The pulley 
is free to move along the crossbar that spans the length of the top of the cage enabling the mouse to 
navigate freely on one half of the cage using its forepaws and to interact with the second mouse in the 
cage, without enabling ambulation of the limbs. Individual food and water sources are provided to each 
mouse and replaced daily. Control mice were housed in identical cages with normal ambulation.  
 

 
Simulated GCR, SPE and gamma irradiation 
On day 13, mice were transported on BNL base to the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) facility 
by animal care staff and were transferred to individual HU boxes to enable whole body irradiation while 
maintaining hindlimb suspension. The following doses of irradiation were administered; simplified GCR sim 
(0.5 Gy), SPE (1 Gy), Gamma (5 Gy) and Sham control (0 Gy). To simulate GCR, we used the simplified 
GCR simulation of ions, energy, and doses determined by a NASA consensus formula  that consists of 5 
ions: protons at 1000 MeV, 28Si at 600 MeV/n, 4He at 250 MeV/n, 16O at 350 MeV/n, 56Fe at 600 MeV/n, 
and protons at 250 MeV. This dose of radiation is equivalent to what an astronaut is predicted to receive in 
deep space during a Mars mission, though it is modeled as a single exposure over 25 minutes instead of 
the actual chronic exposures over 1.5 years. Further, GCR sim is a mixture of high and low LET ions in a 
ratio of 15% to 85%, respectfully. To simulate SPE, we used a total dose of 1Gy protons with energy ranges 
from 50MeV to 150MeV. For all irradiations a 60x60 beam was utilized at NSRL. For radiation dose 
equivalence and biological reference, we used 5 Gy gamma irradiation with the cesium resource available 
at BNL, in the absence of HU due to resource limitations. Sham controls were treated similar to GCR/SPE 
irradiated mice, including HU cage boxes and beam line (without irradiation) for the same duration as GCR 
simualtion, i.e. 25 minutes.  
 
METHODS DETAILS 
 
Flow cytometry 
Collected blood samples were lysed with 1x RBC lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes on ice, washed twice with 1x phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Thermo 
Fisher Scientific), and stored at 4ºC until staining. Single-cell suspensions were generated for flow 
cytometry acquisition. Debris was gated off and doublet discrimination was performed. Cells were Fc 
blocked for 20 minutes and probed with mouse reactive antibodies targeting anti-CD45, anti-CD11b, anti-
Ly6G, anti-NK1.1, anti-CD20, anti-CD3, anti-CD4, anti-CD8, and anti-IL-7R. All antibodies and Fc block 
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Unstained and single-color compensation controls were 
used. Cells were acquired using a BD FACSMelodyTM and analyzed using FlowJoTM Software (v10.5.3). 
 
Quantitative (q)PCR  
Collected blood samples were flash frozen and total RNA isolation using miRNeasy Mini Kit (QIAgen) 
following manufactures’ recommendations. Concentration and purity were determined using a Bioanalyzer 
2100 (Agilent, CA, USA) with RIN number > 8. 1 μg of total RNA was prepared for cDNA synthesis using 
iSCRIPT cDNA synthesis kits (Bio-Rad). Quantitative PCR was performed using iQTM SYBR® Green 
Supermix (Bio-Rad) and primers (IDT) were designed using NCBI design tool. An ABI 7500 Real-Time PCR 
(Applied Biosystems) was used and threshold cycle values that were ≥ 35 cycles were excluded from the 
results. Primer sequence for the following genes are listed in the key resource table. Data was analyzed 
using the ΔΔcT method with Gapdh as the normalizer gene, and relative fold change (RFC) is displayed. 
 
miRNA isolation, sequencing, and data analyses   
Library construction and sequencing was performed from miRNAs isolated from plasma from the mouse 
experiments described above. The miRNA extraction was carried out using the QIAgen miRNeasy 
serum/plasma kit (#217184). The total RNA quality and quantity were analyzed using a Bioanalyzer 2100 
(Agilent, CA, USA) with RIN number > 7. Approximately 1 μg of total RNA was used to prepare small RNA 
library according to protocol of TruSeq Small RNA Sample Prep Kits (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Single-
end sequencing was performed using 50 bp on an Illumina Hiseq 2500 at the LC Sciences (Hangzhou, 
China) following the vendor's recommended protocol. 
 
Raw reads were subjected to an in-house software program, ACGT101-miR (LC Sciences, 
Houston, Texas, USA) to remove adapter dimers, junk, low complexity, common RNA families (rRNA, 
tRNA, snRNA, snoRNA) and repeats. Subsequently, unique sequences with length in 18~26 nucleotide 
were mapped to specific species precursors in miRBase 22.0 by BLAST search to identify known miRNAs 
and novel 3p- and 5p- derived miRNAs. Length variation at both 3’ and 5’ ends and one mismatch inside 
of the sequence were allowed in the alignment. The unique sequences mapping to specific species mature 
miRNAs in hairpin arms were identified as known miRNAs. The unique sequences mapping to the other 
arm of known specific species precursor hairpin opposite to the annotated mature miRNA-containing arm 
were considered to be novel 5p- or 3p- derived miRNA candidates. The remaining sequences were mapped 

 
to other selected species precursors (with the exclusion of specific species) in miRBase 22.0 by BLAST 
search, and the mapped pre-miRNAs were further BLASTed against the specific species genomes to 
determine their genomic locations. The above two we defined as known miRNAs. The unmapped 
sequences were BLASTed against the specific genomes, and the hairpin RNA structures containing 
sequences 
were 
predicated 
from 
the 
flank 
80 
nt 
sequences 
using 
RNAfold 
software 
(http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/cgi-bin/RNAWebSuite/RNAfold.cgi). The criteria for secondary structure 
prediction were: (1) number of nucleotides in one bulge in stem (≤12); (2) number of base pairs in the stem 
region of the predicted hairpin (≥16); (3) cutoff of free energy (kCal/mol ≤-15); (4) length of hairpin (up and 
down stems + terminal loop ≥50); (5) length of hairpin loop (≤20); (6) number of nucleotides in one bulge in 
mature region (≤8); (7) number of biased errors in one bulge in mature region (≤4); (8) number of biased 
bulges in mature region (≤2); (9) number of errors in mature region (≤7); (10) number of base pairs in the 
mature region of the predicted hairpin (≥12); and (11) percent of mature in stem (≥80). Differential 
expression of miRNAs based on normalized deep-sequencing counts was analyzed by selectively using 
Fisher exact test, Chi-squared 2X2 test, Chi-squared nXn test, Student t test, or ANOVA based on the 
experimental design. The significance threshold was set to be 0.01 and 0.05 in each test. The plasma 
miRNA-seq 
raw 
fastq 
files 
can 
be 
found 
on 
NASA’s 
GeneLab 
data 
repository/platform 
(https://genelab.nasa.gov/) with the following identifiers: GLDS-336, DOI: 10.26030/qasa-rr29. 
 
To determine gene ontology (GO) and Hallmark pathways being regulated by the miRNAs we 
performed miRNA gene set analysis utilizing the RBiomirGS v0.2.12 R package (Zhang and Storey, 2018) 
from the processed miRNA analysis for all conditions in the plasma. From the GO terms we chose an FDR 
< 0.05 cutoff for significantly regulated GO Terms. We then determined the specific immune related GO 
terms by mapping to the GO Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) information for specific GO immune terms 
(Smith and Eppig, 2009). We plotted the specific GO terms with R packages UpsetR v1.4.0 (Conway et al., 
2017) and pheatmap v1.0.12 (Kolde R. pheatmap: Pretty heatmaps).  
 
Human physiological inflammation data 
Data are reported from three human subject experiments conducted on the International Space Station: 
Nutritional Status Assessment (2006-2012), Dietary Intake Can Predict and Protect Against Changes in 
Bone Metabolism During Space Flight and Recovery (Pro K) (2010-2015), and Biochemical Profile (2013-
2018). All protocols were reviewed and approved by the NASA Institutional Review Board and all subjects 
provided written informed consent. While subsets of some of these data have been published in other 
papers (Crucian et al., 2018), as a whole, the data provided here have not been previously published. In 
addition, the inflammation data provided have been reanalyzed from data that were submitted with another 
paper included in this special NASA Cell issue (Malkani et al., 2020).  
 
Crews from these experiments completed missions of 4-6 months in duration, and these studies 
included blood collections before, during, and after flight, with analysis of an array of inflammation 
biochemical markers. Blood samples were collected 2 or 3 times before flight: approximately Launch minus 
(L-) 45 days. In some cases, a third blood sample was collected (typically along with the L-45 collection), 
and these tubes were centrifuged and frozen for aliquoting after flight batched with the samples collected 
inflight. Blood samples were collected inflight, at approximately Flight Day (FD) 15, FD30, FD60, FD120, 
and FD180. Postflight samples were collected in the first 24-h after landing (designated return+0, R+0) and 
again 30-d later (R+30). The R+0 samples were not necessarily fasting, given the time of day and nature 
of return from flight. Of the 59 crewmembers reported: 8 returned on the Space Shuttle, with blood collection 
2-4 hours after landing; 51 landed in Kazakhstan, with 7 of them returning to Star City, Russia, with blood 
collection 8-10 hours after landing; 44 were transported directly back to the Johnson Space Center in 
Houston, with blood collection approximately 24-h after landing. Pre and postflight collections included two 
24-h urine collections, and inflight collections included one 24-h urine collection. These collection 
techniques have been previously described (Smith et al., 2012; Zwart et al., 2011). 
 
We report here inflammatory markers were analyzed using standard techniques as reported 
previously (Crucian et al., 2018; Zwart et al., 2016; Zwart et al., 2013; Zwart et al., 2009). As of this writing, 
data were available for 59 crewmembers (47 males and 12 females). Age at launch was 47.0 ± 5.6 y, body 
mass at launch was 79.2 ± 11.8 kg (M: 83.3 ± 9.3; F: 63.0 ± 4.5). Body mass index was 25.5 ± 2.9 kg/m2 
(M: 26.4 ± 2.6; F: 22.3 ± 1.5). All available data are reported here, although the reported n for any given 
test or session varies for a number of reasons, including, not all experiments had all analytes included, 
mission length differences for some crewmembers, schedule or other issues occasionally precluded sample 
collection, and methods changes over time. Repeated measures analysis of variance was conducted to 

 
test for differences during and after flight compared to preflight, and comparisons among time points were 
made using a Bonferroni t-test. Multiple comparisons were accounted for, and only those tests with p*** < 
0.001 are reported. 
 
Quantification and Statistical Analysis  
For Figures 1-5, a Grubbs test was performed on all datasets followed by testing for normal distribution via 
a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. If data were normally distributed, a one-way ANOVA Dunnett test was 
performed to compared NL and HU controls to all groups and a parametric unpaired t-test with Welsh’s 
correction was performed to compared between similar irradiation groups. If normality was not passed, both 
a non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test with a Dunn’s posthoc analyses was performed to compare NL and 
HU controls to all groups and a non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test compared between similar irradiation 
groups were performed. All data are means ±SEM (p < 0.05, n = 5-10 per group depending on associated 
figure). “*” denotes significant difference between NL-Sham and associated group, “#” denotes significant 
difference between HU-Sham associated group, and intergroup “brackets with a &” denotes significant 
difference between each group. Filled circles, boxes, and bars denotes normal loaded (NL) and non-filled 
circles, boxes, and bars denotes hindlimb unloaded (HU). 
For Figure 7, a repeated measures analysis of variance was conducted to test for differences during 
and after flight compared to preflight, and comparisons among time points were made using a Bonferroni 
t-test. Multiple comparisons were accounted for and data are means ±SEM (p*** < 0.001, n = 59 
crewmembers; 47 males, 12 females). GraphPad Prism software was used to analyze all associated figures 
(v. 8.4.2). 
 

 
Supplemental References 
Conway, J.R., Lex, A., and Gehlenborg, N. (2017). UpSetR: an R package for the visualization of 
intersecting sets and their properties. Bioinformatics 33, 2938-2940. 
Crucian, B.E., Chouker, A., Simpson, R.J., Mehta, S., Marshall, G., Smith, S.M., Zwart, S.R., Heer, M., 
Ponomarev, S., Whitmire, A., et al. (2018). Immune System Dysregulation During Spaceflight: Potential 
Countermeasures for Deep Space Exploration Missions. Front Immunol 9, 1437. 
Kozomara, A., Birgaoanu, M., and Griffiths-Jones, S. (2019). miRBase: from microRNA sequences to 
function. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D155-D162. 
Malkani, S., Cekanaviciute, E., Mortreux, M., Okunola, H., Tarbier, M., Schreurs, A.-S., Shirazi-Fard, Y., 
Tahimic, C.G.T., Cheng-Campbell, M., Blaber, E.A., et al. (2020). Circulating miRNA Signature Predicts 
and Rescues Spaceflight Associated Health Risks. Cell. 
Smith, C.L., and Eppig, J.T. (2009). The mammalian phenotype ontology: enabling robust annotation and 
comparative analysis. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 1, 390-399. 
Smith, S.M., Heer, M., Wang, Z., Huntoon, C.L., and Zwart, S.R. (2012). Long-duration space flight and 
bed rest effects on testosterone and other steroids. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97, 270-278. 
Tahimic, C.G.T., Paul, A.M., Schreurs, A.S., Torres, S.M., Rubinstein, L., Steczina, S., Lowe, M., 
Bhattacharya, S., Alwood, J.S., Ronca, A.E., et al. (2019). Influence of Social Isolation During Prolonged 
Simulated Weightlessness by Hindlimb Unloading. Front Physiol 10, 1147. 
Zhang, J., and Storey, K.B. (2018). RBiomirGS: an all-in-one miRNA gene set analysis solution featuring 
target mRNA mapping and expression profile integration. PeerJ 6, e4262. 
Zwart, S.R., Booth, S.L., Peterson, J.W., Wang, Z., and Smith, S.M. (2011). Vitamin K status in 
spaceflight and ground-based models of spaceflight. J Bone Miner Res 26, 948-954. 
Zwart, S.R., Gregory, J.F., Zeisel, S.H., Gibson, C.R., Mader, T.H., Kinchen, J.M., Ueland, P.M., Ploutz-
Snyder, R., Heer, M.A., and Smith, S.M. (2016). Genotype, B-vitamin status, and androgens affect 
spaceflight-induced ophthalmic changes. FASEB J 30, 141-148. 
Zwart, S.R., Morgan, J.L., and Smith, S.M. (2013). Iron status and its relations with oxidative damage and 
bone loss during long-duration space flight on the International Space Station. Am J Clin Nutr 98, 217-
223. 
Zwart, S.R., Oliver, S.A., Fesperman, J.V., Kala, G., Krauhs, J., Ericson, K., and Smith, S.M. (2009). 
Nutritional status assessment before, during, and after long-duration head-down bed rest. Aviat Space 
Environ Med 80, A15-22. 
 
