Comment
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48633-2
Biological horizons: pioneering open science
in the cosmos
Sylvain V. Costes, Chelle L. Gentemann, Steven H. Platts & Lisa A. Carnell
Check for updates
With precious few spaceﬂight missions, all space-related biological and
biomedical-health data are priceless national resources that anyone
should be able to easily access. The NASA Open Science Data Reposi-
tory (OSDR: https://osdr.nasa.gov/bio) plays a crucial role in ensuring
such accessibility, housing comprehensive space-related datasets
derived not only from various model organisms but also from non-
NASA human astronauts1. These datasets cover a wide spectrum of
biological assays conducted at multiple levels, ranging across cells,
tissues, organs, and whole organisms. They effectively capture diverse
types of data, including ‘omics, phenotypic, physiological, and beha-
vioral changes experienced in space2,3. Additionally, OSDR enriches
this data by providing metadata contextualizing each experiment
including the associated experimental hardware and environmental
telemetry. OSDR has worked with a large and open scientiﬁc com-
munity to standardize data generation and formatting, enabling
advanced analytics, including the use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) for
data analysis.
With the support of NASA’s scientiﬁc leadership, the spirit of
Open Science has permeated every scientiﬁc division at NASA,
including the Biological and Physical Science (BPS) Division. The BPS
Division has emerged as a pivotal force in fueling humanity’s fascina-
tion with space exploration by understanding the mechanisms of life
adapting to extreme environmental hazards of deep space4. As NASA
launched the ambitious "Transform to Open Science" program (TOPS)5
in 2023, it aims to accelerate the adoption of a more reproducible and
transparent approach to research. TOPS also aims to train 20,000
scientists in the art of Open Science by 2028 (https://nasa.github.io/
Transform-to-Open-Science/), pushing for better equity and inclusivity
in science. Within the BPS Division, the curation of an extensive array
of space biological, space health, and mission telemetry data in stan-
dardized formats has been vetted by over 500 citizen scientists,
members of the NASA OSDR Analysis Working Groups (AWG - https://
osdr.nasa.gov/bio/awg/join.html). As a result, OSDR system ensures
the invaluable data’s ﬁndability, accessibility, interoperability, and
reusability (FAIR)6, despite the challenges posed by its multi-hier-
archical, multimodal, and heterogeneous nature.
As a celebration of 2023 being the year of Open Science at NASA, a
Nature portfolio Collection titled "The Second Space Age: Omics, Plat-
forms, and Medicine Across Orbits7,’’ is a series of inspiring articles
enabled by OSDR, enriched by new data generously shared by civilian
astronauts aboard the SpaceX Inspiration4 mission. The investigator
team involved in this work has embraced Open Science by sharing
research data and enabling data mining by the AWG community. Data
presented in this Nature portfolio Collection were fully utilized because
of the open and accessible nature of the OSDR system. This array of
work shows how NASA handled the storage and reuse of a diverse range
of data from molecular to ecosystem levels, encompassing tabular,
omics, imaging, code, video, biospecimens, and environmental physical-
chemical telemetry data. The AWGs played a critical role standardizing
metadata
and
data
processing
pipelines
in
OSDR,
enabling
groundbreaking discoveries in space biology and biomedical health by
making meta-analysis possible. In this context, two recent articles
involving the AWGs were published in Nature Machine Intelligence and
featured in a special issue on AI, detailing the future role of AI and Open
Science in deep space biological research8 and biomedical health
support9, describing how Open Science and standardization integrated
with AI can maximize the value of limited yet vital spaceﬂight data.
The spirit of Open Science and the invaluable insights from space
biology have transcended boundaries, extending their embrace to
other vital groups within NASA, including the Human Research Pro-
gram (HRP) focused on the health and performance of NASA Astro-
nauts. This Open Science approach champions practical, collaborative
scientiﬁc discovery, with an emphasis on data sharing and immediate
applications. Insights from space biology, facilitated by Open Science,
are vital not just for aspirational goals like moon and Mars missions,
but for direct advancements in human health and technology on earth.
This Nature portfolio Collection highlights how collective efforts and
open data can drive substantial scientiﬁc progress, merging the thrill
of cosmic exploration with tangible and immediate beneﬁts.
Sylvain V. Costes
1
, Chelle L. Gentemann
2, Steven H. Platts3 &
Lisa A. Carnell4
1Space Biosciences Research Branch, NASA Ames Research Center,
Moffett Field, CA, USA. 2Ofﬁce of the Chief Science Data Ofﬁcer,
Science Mission Directorate, NASA Headquarters, Washington DC on
Intergovernmental Personnel Act assignment from the International
Computer Science Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA. 3Human Research
Program, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA. 4Biological
and Physical Sciences Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC,
USA.
e-mail: sylvain.v.costes@nasa.gov
Received: 10 October 2023; Accepted: 30 April 2024;
References
1.
Berrios, D. C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S. & Costes, S. V. NASA GeneLab: interfaces for
the exploration of space omics data. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D1515–D1522 (2021).
2.
Scott, R. T. et al. Advancing the integration of biosciences data sharing to further enable
space exploration. Cell Rep. 33, 108441 (2020).
3. Ray, S. et al. GeneLab: Omics database for spaceﬂight experiments. Bioinformatics 35,
1753–1759 (2019).
4. Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental biological features of spaceﬂight: advancing the ﬁeld to
enable deep-space exploration. Cell 183, 1162–1184 (2020).
5. Gentemann, C. Why NASA and federal agencies are declaring this the Year of Open Science.
Nature 613, 217 (2023).
6. Berrios, D. C., Beheshti, A. & Costes, S. V. FAIRness and usability for open-access omics data
systems. AMIA Annu Symp. Proc. 2018, 232–241 (2018).
7.
Mason, C. E. et al. A second space age: omics, platforms, and medicine across orbits. Nature.
2024 (in press).
8. Sanders, L. M. et al. Biological research and self-driving labs in deep space supported by
artiﬁcial intelligence. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 208–219 (2023).
9. Scott, R. T. et al. Biomonitoring and precision health in deep space supported by artiﬁcial
intelligence. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 196–207 (2023).
nature communications
  (2024) 15:4780 |
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

Author contributions
S.V.C wrote the main commentary. C.L.G., L.A.C.,and S.H.P. wrote speciﬁc parts relevant to their
respective activities at NASA. C.L.G. discussed the Transform to Open Science (TOPS) program,
L.A.C. focused on Open Science strategies at the Biological and Physical Sciences Division and
S.H.P. discussed how the Human Research Program places itself in this new ecosystem.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Sylvain V. Costes.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub-
lished maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other
third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign copyright
protection may apply 2024
Comment
nature communications
  (2024) 15:4780 |
2
