BRIEF COMMUNICATION
Bone shaft bending strength index is unaffected
by exercise and unloading in mice
Ian J. Wallace,1 Shikha Gupta,2 Jeyantt Sankaran,2 Brigitte Demes3 and Stefan Judex2
1Department of Anthropology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
3Department of Anatomical Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
Abstract
Anthropologists frequently use the shaft bending strength index to infer the physical activity levels of humans
living in the past from their lower limb bone remains. This index is typically calculated as the ratio of bone
shaft second moments of area about orthogonal principal axes (i.e. Imax/Imin). Individuals with high Imax/Imin
values are inferred to have been very active, whereas individuals with low values are inferred to have been
more sedentary. However, there is little direct evidence that activity has a causal and predictable effect on the
shaft bending strength index. Here, we report the results of two experiments that were designed to test the
model within which anthropologists commonly interpret the shaft bending strength index. In the ﬁrst
experiment, mice were treated daily with treadmill exercise for 1 month to simulate a high-activity lifestyle. In
the second experiment, in an attempt to simulate a low-activity lifestyle, functional weight-bearing was
removed from the hindlimbs of mice for 1 month. Femoral mid-shaft structure was determined with lCT. We
found that while exercise resulted in signiﬁcant enhancement of Imax and Imin compared with controls, it failed
to signiﬁcantly increase the Imax/Imin index. Similarly, stunted bone growth caused by unloading resulted in
signiﬁcantly diminished Imax and Imin compared with controls, but low activity did not lead to signiﬁcantly
decreased Imax/Imin compared with normal activity. Together, these results suggest that caution is required
when the bone shaft bending strength index is used to reconstruct the activity levels of past humans.
Key words: anthropology; bioarchaeology; bone functional adaptation; cortical bone; cross-sectional geometry;
diaphyseal shape; physical activity.
Introduction
Anthropologists
frequently
analyze
the
cross-sectional
geometry of lower limb bone shafts to infer the physical
activity levels of past humans from their skeletal remains
(Ruff, 2008). This strategy is based on the well-documented
capacity of bone shafts to adjust their morphology in
response to mechanical loading, particularly during the
growing years (Lieberman et al. 2001; McKay et al. 2005;
Weeks et al. 2008). Of the geometric properties used to
infer activity levels, the bending strength index is often
considered the most informative (Ruff, 1987; Brock & Ruff,
1988; Larsen et al. 1995; Holt, 2003; Stock, 2006; Lieverse
et al. 2011).
The bending strength index can be calculated in two
ways, as the ratio of shaft second moments of area in the
anteroposterior plane to second moments of area in the
mediolateral plane (Ix/Iy) and, more commonly, as the ratio
of second moments of area about orthogonal principal axes
(Imax/Imin). Shafts with Ix/Iy values close to 1 are roughly
circular, whereas shafts with values greater or < 1 are more
elliptical. The same logic applies to Imax/Imin, but this ratio is
always ≥1. In anthropological analyses, individuals with
elliptical shafts are inferred to have been more physically
active, as doing a lot of walking and running will tend to
stress one’s lower limb bones in a particular direction
(Cavanagh & LaFortune, 1980; Munro et al. 1987; Yang
et al. 2014), whereas individuals with circular shafts are
inferred to have been more sedentary.
The utility of a relatively simple measure of physical activ-
ity level such as the bone shaft bending strength index is
Correspondence
Ian J. Wallace, Department of Anthropology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. E: ian.wallace@stonybrook.edu
Accepted for publication 23 December 2014
Article published online 2 February 2015
© 2015 Anatomical Society
J. Anat. (2015) 226, pp224--228
doi: 10.1111/joa.12277
Journal of Anatomy

readily apparent. However, while there is strong experimen-
tal support for a causal link between physical activity level
and cross-sectional properties describing overall shaft robus-
ticity (size), direct evidence is currently lacking that activity
level has a causal and predictable effect on the shaft bend-
ing strength index. Here, we report the results of two
experiments involving mice as a model organism that tested
whether high activity levels indeed lead to more elliptical
limb bone shafts and low activity levels lead to more
circular shafts. In the ﬁrst experiment, animals were treated
daily with a treadmill exercise regimen to simulate a
high-activity lifestyle. In the second experiment, animals
were suspended from their tails to cause prolonged limb
unloading and simulate a low-activity lifestyle.
Materials and methods
All experimental procedures were reviewed and approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Stony Brook
University.
Experiment 1: exercise
Female Hsd:ICR mice (n = 40) were acquired at 3 weeks old from
Harlan Sprague Dawley (Indianapolis, ID, USA). As Hsd:ICR is an out-
bred stock (as opposed to an inbred strain), genetics was an uncon-
trolled variable. Mice from this particular stock were chosen for
analysis because exercise-loading has previously been shown to
have positive effects on their hindlimb bone structure (Kelly et al.
2006). Animals were housed individually and maintained on a
12:12 h light:dark cycle with free access to food and water. At 4
weeks old, animals were divided into runners and sedentary con-
trols (n = 20/group). Groups were matched according to body
mass. Runners were treated 5 days per week for 4 weeks with 30
min of exercise on a six-lane treadmill (Columbus Instruments,
Columbus, OH, USA) at a rate of 12 m min1. At 8 weeks old, ani-
mals were killed, and right femora were extracted.
Femora were scanned at a 10-lm3 voxel size (70 kVp, 114 lA,
150-ms integration time) using a lCT 40 scanner (Scanco Medical
AG, Br€uttisellen, Switzerland). The volume of interest was a 600-
lm-long region of the mid-shaft. Volumes were segmented using a
constrained 3D Gaussian ﬁlter to reduce noise (support = 1, sigma =
0.1) and thresholded to extract the bone phase using a single
threshold value for all bones. Imax and Imin were computed using
the internal imaging code supplied by the scanner manufacturer.
These properties were chosen to calculate the bending strength
index, rather than Ix and Iy, as they are based on the intrinsic distri-
bution of bone in the shaft and thus provide a better measure of
shape (Shaw & Stock, 2009). Values were sized-standardized by the
product of body mass and bone length, as recommended when
analyzing
shaft
second
moments
of
area
in
weight-bearing
elements (Ruff et al. 1993; Ruff, 2008).
Experiment 2: unloading
Female F2 mice (n = 29) were bred from a double-cross of female
BAL/cByJ and male C3H/HeJ progenitors purchased from The Jack-
son Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Hindlimb unloading has
previously been shown to have a catabolic effect on bone structure
in these mice (Judex et al. 2004, 2013). Again, as these mice are
genetically heterogeneous, genetics was an uncontrolled variable.
Animals were housed individually and kept on a 12:12 h light:dark
cycle with food and water freely available. At 16 weeks old, animals
were assigned to an unloading group (n = 14) or control group (n =
15), which were also matched by body mass. Hindlimb unloading
was induced for 4 weeks by hindlimb elevation through tail suspen-
sion (Morey-Holton & Globus, 2002). Brieﬂy, cloth tape was applied
to the tail and secured to a cable system connected to a swivel
mounted at the top of the cage, which allowed 360° free rotation.
The elevation of the cable was adjusted to maintain the animal at
roughly 30° head-down tilt, such that its forelimbs contacted the
cage ﬂoor but its hindlimbs were freed from weight-bearing. Ani-
mals were kept in a suspended position 24 h day1, but could access
food and water with their forelimbs. Mice in the control group
engaged in normal weight-bearing cage activities.
Immediately prior to and after unloading, all animals underwent
in vivo lCT scanning (VivaCT 75, Scanco Medical AG) to track longi-
tudinal changes in shaft structure in the right femur. A 600-lm-long
mid-shaft volume was scanned in vivo at a 20.5 lm3 voxel size
(45 kVp, 177 lA, 200-ms integration time). During scanning, mice
were sedated by inhalation anesthesia with isoﬂurane. lCT image
processing followed the same protocol as in the ﬁrst experiment.
Statistics
Independent samples t-tests were performed to test for differences
in traits between animals treated with treadmill exercise and seden-
tary controls. In the unloading and control groups, paired samples
t-tests were used to assess change in bone properties over the
experimental period. To test for treatment effects between the
unloading and control groups, ANCOVAs were carried out with post-
treatment values as dependent variables and baseline values as the
covariate (Vickers, 2001). Analyses were performed in R software (R
Core
Development
Team,
2014).
The
signiﬁcance
level
was
P < 0.05, and tests were two-tailed. Descriptive statistics are
provided in Tables S1 and S2.
Fig. 1 Relative difference in femoral mid-shaft traits between controls
and exercised animals. Bars equal the percent difference between the
exercise mean relative to the control mean. Whiskers equal the standard
deviation of the sampling distribution of the relative difference. Asterisks
indicate statistically signiﬁcant (P < 0.05) differences between groups.
© 2015 Anatomical Society
Bone shaft bending strength index, I. J. Wallace et al. 225

Results
Experiment 1: exercise
Treatment with treadmill exercise resulted in signiﬁcantly
greater femoral mid-shaft Imax (P = 0.004) and Imin (P = 0.005)
compared with sedentary controls (Fig. 1). However, exer-
cise did not signiﬁcantly alter the Imax/Imin bending strength
index (P = 0.74), indicating that the simulated high-activity
lifestyle did not lead to more elliptically shaped femoral
mid-shafts.
Experiment 2: unloading
In control animals, femoral mid-shaft Imax and Imin both
increased signiﬁcantly (P < 0.0001) over the course of the
experimental period (Fig. 2). By contrast, in animals sub-
jected to hindlimb unloading, little change occurred in
either Imax (P = 0.34) or Imin (P = 0.40). Stunted normal bone
growth in the unloading group ultimately led to signiﬁ-
cantly (P < 0.0001) diminished femoral mid-shaft Imax and
Imin compared with controls. During the experiment, the
Imax/Imin bending strength index decreased signiﬁcantly and
roughly equally in the control (P = 0.007) and unloading
groups (P = 0.002), such that the simulated low-activity life-
style did not result in greater femoral mid-shaft circularity
compared with normal activity (P = 0.64).
Discussion
Extrapolating experimental data from mice to humans
requires caution given critical differences between species,
including size, locomotor styles and bone tissue composi-
tion. Even so, mice are the experimental model of choice in
most bone biology research for both logistical reasons and
because the genes and molecules inﬂuencing the skeleton
are highly conserved in mice and humans (Karsenty &
Ferron, 2012). Furthermore, the skeletal reaction to altera-
tions
in
mechanical
environment
is
generally
similar
between species (Squire et al. 2004; Luu et al. 2009). If
extrapolation of mouse data to humans is warranted, then
the results of the two experiments presented here suggest
that high- and low-activity lifestyles do not have the causal
effects on the shaft bending strength index that are often
assumed in anthropological analyses of human lower limb
bone shaft structure (Ruff, 1987; Brock & Ruff, 1988; Larsen
et al. 1995; Holt, 2003; Stock, 2006; Lieverse et al. 2011).
The results of the ﬁrst experiment are generally consistent
with those of previous experiments involving animal mod-
els, as well as longitudinal studies involving humans, that
measured the effects of exercise on the bone shaft bending
strength index. Similar to our experiment, Lieberman et al.
(2001) and Plochocki et al. (2008) treated sheep and mice,
respectively, with a running regimen and documented sig-
niﬁcant exercise-related enlargements of hindlimb shaft
Imax and Imin but no signiﬁcant increase in the Imax/Imin
index. In a prospective human study by Macdonald et al.
(2009), in which growing boys engaged in a school-based
exercise program comprised of jumping, skipping, dancing
and playground circuits, positive change in tibial Imax during
the trial period was signiﬁcantly greater in the exercise
group compared with a control group, yet change in Imax/
Imin was not signiﬁcantly altered by exercise. Vainionp€a€a
et al. (2007) conducted a study in which adult women par-
ticipated regularly in exercise sessions that included step
patterns, stamping, jumping, running and walking. In both
the femur and tibia, longitudinal changes in Imax, Imin and
Imax/Imin were not signiﬁcantly affected by exercise, perhaps
reﬂecting the diminished responsiveness of the adult skele-
ton to loading. To our knowledge, no experimental or lon-
gitudinal study has ever documented a signiﬁcant increase
in limb bone shaft Imax/Imin resulting from engagement in
an exercise regimen.
The results of the second experiment are novel, and thus
they are unlikely to be accepted outright without replica-
tion. Therefore, it is instructive to compare these results with
those obtained from separate but similar experiments per-
formed in our laboratory. In an unpublished study, we trea-
ted growing female mice with hindlimb unloading for 2
weeks starting at 9 weeks old and, consistent with our initial
results, normal development of femoral Imax and Imin was
found to be signiﬁcantly retarded by unloading but the shaft
bending strength index was not affected (Fig. S1). In another
study, skeletally mature adult male mice were tail-suspended
for 2 weeks beginning at 28 weeks old, and instead of stun-
ting normal bone growth, unloading led to signiﬁcant loss
of femoral Imax and Imin compared with morphological stasis
among controls (Fig. S2; see also Gupta et al. 2012). Yet,
Fig. 2 Longitudinal change in femoral mid-shaft traits in controls and
animals treated with hindlimb unloading. Bars equal mean percent
change relative to baseline values, and whiskers equal the standard
deviation. Single asterisks indicate statistically signiﬁcant (P < 0.05)
longitudinal change within groups during the experiment. Double
asterisks indicate signiﬁcant differences between groups at the end of
the experiment, determined by statistical analyses that controlled for
baseline variation.
© 2015 Anatomical Society
Bone shaft bending strength index, I. J. Wallace et al.
226

once again, the femoral shaft bending strength index was
not altered by unloading. At present, all experimental data
of which we are aware indicate that unloading does not lead
to more circular shafts, regardless of whether it occurs early
or later in life (but, see Lanyon, 1980).
What evidence exists then for the link between physical
activity level and the bone shaft bending strength index
that is assumed in many anthropological analyses of
human skeletal remains? Two types of indirect evidence
are frequently cited. First, differences in the shaft bending
strength index have been observed among living human
populations with distinct activity patterns. For example,
Shaw & Stock (2009) analyzed tibial mid-shaft shape
among university cross-country runners, ﬁeld hockey play-
ers and non-athletic controls, and found that, relative to
both hockey players and controls, runners exhibited more
elliptical shafts, primarily due to enhanced bending rigidity
in the anteroposterior plane. The authors speculated that
the elliptical shape of the runners’ shafts was caused by the
repetitive anteroposterior tibial loading that characterizes
their training regimen, although this could not be demon-
strated conclusively as this was a cross-sectional study and
not a longitudinal study. Second, in anthropological stud-
ies of humans living in the past, changes in archaeological
measures of settlement patterns that are concomitant with
changes in the bone shaft bending strength index may sug-
gest a connection between physical activity level and shaft
shape. For example, Holt (2003) has shown that during the
European Upper Paleolithic, femoral shafts became more
circular at roughly the same time that changes in the
archaeological record point to increasing population den-
sity and sedentism. Of these two types of indirect evidence,
we ﬁnd the former to be somewhat more persuasive as the
activity patterns of living groups are actually known, while
those of ancient populations are not.
There are also two lines of direct evidence that are often
cited to support the idea of a close relationship between
physical activity level and the bone shaft bending strength
index. First, the hypothesis that elliptically shaped bone shafts
reﬂect high levels of physical activity is based on the premise
that bone formation primarily takes place in the plane that
bones engender peak mechanical stresses and strains; and
the results of certain experiments with animal models in
which in vivo strains were directly related to patterns of bone
growth support this assumption. For example, peak magni-
tude strains have been associated with sites of increased bone
formation in experiments involving external loading of
rodent limbs (Mosley et al. 1997; Warden et al. 2004) and
natural physiological limb loading in goats (Main, 2007). In
contrast, however, other experiments involving weight-
bearing exercise in chickens and sheep (Judex et al. 1997;
Wallace et al. 2014) and exogenous limb loading in turkeys
(Gross et al. 1997) found no signiﬁcant associations between
bone formation stimulated by loading and local strain magni-
tude. Ultimately, the disparity between results from different
experiments suggests to us that a universal relationship
between bone growth and local strain magnitude probably
does not exist and, therefore, that loading cannot be
assumed to have a predictable effect on shaft shape in every
instance. Second, in the aforementioned longitudinal human
study by Vainionp€a€a et al. (2007), although engagement in
the exercise regimen did not signiﬁcantly alter the lower limb
bone shaft bending strength index, across the entire study
population (i.e. exercise participants and controls), weak but
signiﬁcant positive correlations were detected between the
number of daily impacts (measured by accelerometer) and
changes in femoral and tibial Imax/Imin throughout the course
of the study. This is arguably the most compelling evidence
for a causal relationship between physical activity level and
human lower limb bone shaft shape. Nevertheless, until addi-
tional direct evidence is available from longitudinal and/or
experimental studies, we suggest that much prudence is nec-
essary when the shaft bending strength index is used to infer
the activity levels of past humans.
Acknowledgements
The funding for this research was provided by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (grants NNX08BA35G and
NNX12AL25G) and the L.S.B. Leakey Foundation (grant 49357).
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Author contributions
I.J.W., S.G., J.S., B.D. and S.J. conceived, designed and
performed the experiments; I.J.W., S.G. and J.S. analyzed
the data; I.J.W. wrote the paper.
References
Brock SL, Ruff CB (1988) Diachronic patterns of change in struc-
tural properties of the femur in the prehistoric American
Southwest. Am J Phys Anthropol 75, 113–127.
Cavanagh PR, LaFortune MA (1980) Ground reaction forces in
distance running. J Biomech 13, 397–406.
Gross TS, Edwards JL, McLeod KJ, et al. (1997) Strain gradients
correlate with sites of periosteal bone formation. J Bone
Miner Res 12, 982–988.
Gupta S, Vijayaraghavan S, Uzer G, et al. (2012) Multiple expo-
sures to unloading decrease bone’s responsivity but compound
skeletal losses in C57BL/6 mice. Am J Physiol Regul Intergr Comp
Physiol 303, R159–R167.
Holt BM (2003) Mobility in Upper Paleolithic and Mesolithic Eur-
ope: evidence from the lower limb. Am J Phys Anthropol 122,
200–215.
Holton ER, Globus RK (2002) Hindlimb unloading rodent model:
technical aspects. J Appl Physiol 92, 1367–1377.
Judex S, Gross TS, Zernicke RF (1997) Strain gradients correlate
with sites of exercise-induced bone-forming surfaces in the
adult skeleton. J Bone Miner Res 12, 1737–1745.
© 2015 Anatomical Society
Bone shaft bending strength index, I. J. Wallace et al. 227

Judex S, Garman R, Squire M, et al. (2004) Genetically linked
site-speciﬁcity of disuse osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res 19,
607–613.
Judex S, Zhang W, Donahue LR, et al. (2013) Genetic loci that
control the loss and regain of trabecular bone during unload-
ing and reambulation. J Bone Miner Res 28, 1537–1549.
Karsenty G, Ferron M (2012) The contribution of bone to
whole-organism physiology. Nature 481, 314–320.
Kelly SA, Czech PP, Wight JT, et al. (2006) Experimental evolution
and phenotypic plasticity of hindlimb bones in high-activity
house mice. J Morphol 267, 360–374.
Lanyon LE (1980) The inﬂuence of function on the development
of bone curvature. An experimental study on the rat tibia.
J Zool Lond 192, 457–466.
Larsen CS, Ruff CB, Kelly RL (1995) Structural analysis of the
Stillwater postcranial human remains: behavioral implications
of
articular
joint
pathology
and
long
bone
diaphyseal
morphology. Anthropol Pap Am Mus 77, 107–133.
Lieberman
DE,
Devlin
MJ,
Pearson
OM
(2001)
Articular
area responses to mechanical loading: effects of exercise,
age, and skeletal location. Am J Phys Anthropol 116, 266–277.
Lieverse AR, Stock JT, Katzenberg MA, et al. (2011) The bioar-
chaeology of habitual activity and dietary change in the
Siberian Middle Holocene. In: Human Bioarchaeology of the
Transition to Agriculture. (eds Pinhasi R, Stock JT), pp. 265–
291. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Luu YK, Capilla E, Rosen CH, et al. (2009) Mechanical stimula-
tion of mesenchymal stem cell proliferation and differentia-
tion promotes osteogenesis while preventing dietary-induced
obesity. J Bone Miner Res 24, 50–61.
Macdonald HM, Cooper DML, McKay HA (2009) Anterior-poster-
ior bending strength at the tibial shaft increases with physical
activity in boys: evidence for non-uniform geometric adapta-
tion. Osteoporos Int 20, 61–70.
Main RP (2007) Ontogenetic relationships between in vivo strain
environment, bone histomorphometry and growth in the goat
radius. J Anat 210, 272–293.
McKay HA, MacLean L, Petit M, et al. (2005) “Bounce at the
Bell”: a novel program of short bouts of exercise improves
proximal femur bone mass in early pubertal children. Br
J Sports Med 39, 521–526.
Mosley JR, March BM, Lynch J, et al. (1997) Strain magnitude
related changes in whole bone architecture in growing rats.
Bone 20, 191–198.
Munro CF, Miller DI, Fuglevand AJ (1987) Ground reaction
forces in running: a re-examination. J Biomech 20, 147–155.
Plochocki JH, Rivera JP, Zhang C, et al. (2008) Bone modeling
response to voluntary exercise in the hindlimb of mice. J Mor-
phol 269, 313–318.
R Core Development Team (2014) R: A Language and Environ-
ment for Statistical Computing. Vienna: R Foundation for Sta-
tistical Computing.
Ruff CB (1987) Sexual dimorphism in human lower limb bone
structure: relationships to subsistence strategy and sexual divi-
sion of labor. J Hum Evol 16, 391–416.
Ruff CB (2008) Biomechanical analyses of archaeological human
skeletons. In: Biological Anthropology of the Human Skeleton.
(eds Katzenberg MA, Saunders SR), pp. 183–206. New York:
Alan R. Liss.
Ruff CB, Trinkaus E, Walker A, et al. (1993) Postcranial robustici-
ty in Homo. I: temporal trends and mechanical interpretation.
Am J Phys Anthropol 91, 21–53.
Shaw CN, Stock JT (2009) Intensity, repetitiveness, and direction-
ality of habitual adolescent mobility patterns inﬂuence the
tibial diaphysis morphology of athletes. Am J Phys Anthropol
140, 149–159.
Squire M, Donahue LR, Rubin C, et al. (2004) Genetic variations
that regulate bone morphology in the male mouse skeleton
do not deﬁne its susceptibility to mechanical unloading. Bone
35, 1353–1360.
Stock JT (2006) Robusticity relative to patterns of mobility,
climatic adaptation, and selection for tissue economy. Am
J Phys Anthropol 131, 194–204.
Vainionp€a€a A, Korpelainen R, Siev€anen H, et al. (2007) Effect of
impact exercise and its intensity on bone geometry at weight-
bearing tibia and femur. Bone 40, 604–611.
Vickers AJ (2001) The use of percentage change from baseline
as an outcome in a controlled trial is statistically inefﬁcient: a
simulation study. BMC Med Res Methodol 1, 6.
Wallace IJ, Demes B, Mongle C, et al. (2014) Exercise-induced
bone formation is poorly linked to local strain magnitude in
the sheep tibia. PLoS ONE 9, e99108.
Warden SJ, Fuchs RK, Turner CH (2004) Steps for targeting exer-
cise towards the skeleton to increase bone strength. Eur Med
Phys 40, 223–232.
Weeks BK, Young CM, Beck BR (2008) Eight months of regular
in-school jumping improves indices of bone strength in ado-
lescent boys and girls: the POWER PE study. J Bone Miner Res
23, 1002–1011.
Yang P-F, Sanno M, Ganse B, et al. (2014) Torsion and antero-
posterior bending in the in vivo human tibia loading regimes
during walking and running. PLoS ONE 9, e94525.
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online
version of this article:
Fig. S1. Change in femoral mid-shaft traits in growing controls
and animals treated with hindlimb unloading.
Fig. S2. Longitudinal change in femoral mid-shaft traits in skele-
tally mature adult controls and animals treated with hindlimb
unloading.
Table S1. Femoral mid-shaft trait values of controls and animals
treated with treadmill exercise at the end of the experiment.
Table S2. Femoral mid-shaft trait values of controls and animals
treated with hindlimb unloading at baseline and after the treat-
ment period.
© 2015 Anatomical Society
Bone shaft bending strength index, I. J. Wallace et al.
228
