iScience
Review
Caenorhabditis elegans in microgravity:
An omics perspective
Amanda Scott,1 Craig R.G. Willis,2 Masafumi Muratani,3 Atsushi Higashitani,4 Timothy Etheridge,5
Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,1,6 and Colleen S. Deane5,7,*
SUMMARY
The application of omics to study Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) in the
context of spaceﬂight is increasing, illuminating the wide-ranging biological im-
pacts of spaceﬂight on physiology. In this review, we highlight the application
of omics, including transcriptomics, genomics, proteomics, multi-omics, and inte-
grated omics in the study of spaceﬂown C. elegans, and discuss the impact, use,
and future direction of this branch of research. We highlight the variety of molec-
ular alterations that occur in response to spaceﬂight, most notably changes in
metabolic and neuromuscular gene regulation. These transcriptional features
are reproducible and evident across many spaceﬂown species (e.g., mice and as-
tronauts), supporting the use of C. elegans as a model organism to study space-
ﬂight physiology with translational capital. Integrating tissue-speciﬁc, spatial,
and multi-omics approaches, which quantitatively link molecular responses to
phenotypic adaptations, will facilitate the identiﬁcation of candidate regulatory
molecules for therapeutic intervention and thus represents the next frontiers in
C. elegans space omics research.
INTRODUCTION
Since Yuri Gagarin ﬁrst traveled to space in 1961, human spaceﬂight activity has grown rapidly. One of the
most notable events to date was the 1998 launch of the International Space Station (ISS), a lower Earth or-
biting research platform, which allows astronauts to live and work in space for up to a year at a time.1 The
microgravity environment of space presents an extreme environmental stressor, which induces a multitude
of physiological maladaptations including, but not limited to, skeletal muscle and bone loss, cardiovascular
decline, immune compromise,2 neuronal damage, and decreased gray matter volume.3 These resemble
some of the adverse health changes associated with chronological aging on Earth, and additionally serve
as an accelerated model of other non-communicable health concerns such as diabetes, cardiovascular dis-
ease, and obesity.4 As people look to travel further into space and for longer periods than ever before—
owing to the rise in commercial spaceﬂight and increasingly lower cost access to space—understanding
the mechanistic underpinnings of spaceﬂight-induced maladaptation is essential to developing effective
countermeasures that promote safe space travel and also beneﬁt health on Earth.
Human and rodent studies have provided invaluable insight into the mechanistic regulation of the micro-
gravity phenotype; however, they are limited by signiﬁcant operational (e.g., crew time, human/rodent
numbers, and sample feasibility) and economical (e.g., high costs) constraints.5,6 Alternative model organ-
isms are, therefore, required to achieve the experimental power necessary to draw conclusions on the
causes of space-induced health decline. Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) is a non-parasitic, micro-
scopic (0.25–1 mm) nematode characterized by a short lifespan (3 weeks), large brood size, fully
sequenced genome, multiple evolutionary conserved mechanisms, ease of culture, and low expense,7 pre-
senting a primary biologically relevant model for spaceﬂight research that is relatively cheap and feasible.
In fact, C. elegans spaceﬂight experiments have been conducted since the time of the space shuttle. Pre-
vious studies have shown that C. elegans can mate, reproduce, and undergo embryonic development dur-
ing spaceﬂight, and they are also susceptible to radiation-induced mutations during spaceﬂight.8,9 How-
ever, since these experiments were performed on ordinary agar medium, the effects of strong
hydrostatic pressure adhesion between the C. elegans and the agar surface could not be ruled out. There-
fore, in examining the effects of microgravity, a liquid culture was devised. The ﬁrst space experiment to
1Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Heritage College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio
University, Athens, OH, USA
2School of Chemistry and
Biosciences, Faculty of Life
Sciences, University of
Bradford, Bradford, UK
3Transborder Medical
Research Center and
Department of Genome
Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575,
Japan
4Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan
5Department of Sport and
Health Sciences, College of
Life and Environmental
Sciences, University of Exeter,
Exeter, UK
6Ohio Musculoskeletal and
Neurological Institute, Ohio
University, Athens, OH, USA
7Human Development &
Health, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton,
Southampton General
Hospital, Southampton, UK
*Correspondence:
c.s.deane@soton.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2023.107189
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023 ª 2023 The Authors.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS

test the difference between liquid and agar media could not be analyzed due to an unforeseen accident on
Columbia’s return. However, the C. elegans were found alive a few days later, protected by a sturdy
container.10 Since then, our space experiments have been conducted using CeMM (C. elegans Mainte-
nance Medium)11 and E. coli OP-50 liquid media. In addition, C. elegans permit the use of genetic and mo-
lecular tools (e.g., genetic mutants), to dissect speciﬁc biological pathways and trial emerging countermea-
sures, such as the efﬁcacy of preclinical drugs.12 Since C. elegans display high molecular, metabolic, and
physiologic orthology with people, with as much as 83% of the C. elegans proteome sharing homologous
genes with humans,13 they serve as efﬁcient model organisms to understand (human) disease processes.
For example, their use as a biomedical research model organism has been invaluable in the study of Alz-
heimer disease and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.14 Speciﬁc to spaceﬂight, C. elegans successfully live in
microgravity15 and display reduced movement capacity,16 analogous to the decline in muscle function
observed in astronauts post-ﬂight,17 demonstrating the suitability of C. elegans as a model organism to
study the effects of spaceﬂight on physiology. Therefore, using C. elegans to uncover the precise molecular
mechanisms regulating adaptations to microgravity can signiﬁcantly accelerate our understanding of the
mechanisms of spaceﬂight-induced physiological decline in humans.
Recently, there has been an exponential increase in the use of ‘‘omics’’ technologies and informatic tools to
probe the etiology of, and develop countermeasures for, pathological states,18 including spaceﬂight.19
The application of omics seeks to establish the sum of the parts within a biological system, rather than iden-
tifying individual components, promoting a holistic rather than reductive path of biological study.20 In addi-
tion to the beneﬁcial ‘‘systems biology’’ approach, omics can capitalize on pre-existing biological samples
(i.e., samples that were collected before the omics ‘‘boom’’ and ‘‘bio-banked’’ samples), which are partic-
ularly rare in the context of spaceﬂight. Recently, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) launched project ‘‘GeneLab’’ to allow free and unrestricted access to omics data from spaceﬂight
experiments to researchers all over the globe.21 The success of this open-science model has maximized the
use of scarce spaceﬂight biological samples and led to several discoveries otherwise not possible, such as
the identiﬁcation of spaceﬂight CO2 levels as a confounding variable in the animal enclosure modules used
in rodent experiments.22 More recently, the European Space Agency (ESA)-funded Space Omics Topical
Team has supported new and ongoing ESA scientiﬁc community activities that focus on the application
and exploitation of omics research in space.23,24 Indeed, omics technology has been applied to spaceﬂight
research using C. elegans, leading to a more complete understanding of biological processes that occur in
response to spaceﬂight, although these works remain to be consolidated.
The aim of this narrative review is, therefore, to summarize the literature pertaining to the use of C. elegans
as a model organism for spaceﬂight-related research with a speciﬁc focus on publications that have applied
omics technologies to uncover the mechanistic basis of the microgravity phenotype, thus highlighting how
the extensive use of C. elegans in spaceﬂight research has constructed a more coherent picture of the bio-
logical response to spaceﬂight. To do this, we provide an overview of the available omics literature,
including hyper-, micro-, and simulated gravity scenarios, highlighting key biological themes and, where
relevant, highlight how the molecular ﬂight-responsive signatures in worms correspond with known molec-
ular and/or functional adaptations reported in higher animals and humans. We also summarize the impact
of the C. elegans space omics literature to date and highlight what we believe are the next frontiers in
C. elegans space omics research. Although previous reviews have appreciated the use of C. elegans as
a model organism for spaceﬂight research, these reviews have either not focused on omics25 or are non-
comprehensive due to geographical constraints.24 Thus, global efforts combining C. elegans and omics
in space remain to be detailed.
OMICS INVESTIGATIONS OF C. ELEGANS IN MICROGRAVITY
To date, the majority of omics spaceﬂight research in C. elegans is transcriptomic in nature, with far fewer
proteomic investigations and comparative omics analysis (summarized in Tables 1, 2, and 3, respectively).
Together, these investigations have revealed robust metabolic and neuromuscular biological themes, dis-
cussed herein (Figure 1).
Metabolic alterations in microgravity
Both transcriptomic and proteomic investigations have been applied in an effort to understand the biological
response of C. elegans to spaceﬂight, which have revealed robust metabolic alterations. In fact, three inde-
pendent spaceﬂight missions, the FIRST International C. elegans Experiment in space (ICE-FIRST), C. elegans
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review

Table 1. Transcriptomic investigations of C. elegans in the context of microgravity
Authors
Spaceﬂight
Mission/s
Omics Analysis
Platform
Key Outcomes
Take Home Message
Celen et al.26
CERISE
Simulated
microgravity
RNA-seq
- Simulated microgravity affects the
sphingolipid signaling pathway and
the longevity-regulating insulin/IGF-1 pathway
- 118 genes were identiﬁed as
commonly differentially expressed in
C. elegans exposed to either simulated
microgravity or spaceﬂight
Detrimental effects from spaceﬂight
are replicable in simulated microgravity
and pose long-term health concerns
Sudevan et al.27
CERISE
EPIGENETICS
MME
Simulated
microgravity
Microarray
- Spaceﬂown C. elegans consistently
display decreased comt-4 gene expression
(a catechol-O-methyltransferase dopamine
degradation enzyme)
Targeting the dopamine system may
be a viable and realistic therapeutic
to promote safe space travel
Sun et al.28
Simulated
microgravity
RNA-seq
- Multiple intestinal long non-coding RNAs
were increased/decreased by simulated
microgravity
- Knockdown of a candidate long
non-coding RNA and simulated
microgravity led to the dysregulation
of 43 genes
Long non-coding RNAs are involved
in regulating the response to
simulated microgravity
Higashitani et al.29
EPIGENETICS
Microarray
- 39 genes expressed in C. elegans in
response to microgravity are suppressed
by the action of HDA-4
(At least some) transcriptional changes
caused by microgravity are
epigenetically
controlled
Sun et al.30
Simulated
microgravity
miRNA-Seq
- 19 miRNAs are dysregulated by exposure
to simulated microgravity, many of which
served to protect against the toxicity
of microgravity
miRNA regulation can be protective
against the negative effects of
simulated microgravity
Tee et al.31
Simulated
microgravity
Microarray
- 1 gene was downregulated in nematode
growth medium-cultured C. elegans
exposed to simulated microgravity
- 6 genes were upregulated and 2
downregulated in C. elegans exposed
to Maintenance Medium during
microgravity
- 5 of the upregulated genes
encoded non-coding RNAs
Simulated microgravity on a
single generation of C. elegans did
not induce major
transcriptional changes
Gao et al.32
SZ-8
Microarray
microRNA
microarray
- Protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
is receptive to microgravity and space radiation
- Microgravity impacts transcription depending
on the dystrophin gene (dys-1)
- Loss of function of ced-1 (apoptotic gene)
leads protective responses to space radiation
Microgravity elicits transcriptional
changes in C. elegans during
short-duration spaceﬂight
Higashibata
et al.33
CERISE
Microarray
- Downregulation of muscle-related genes
(such as the myosin heavy chains, troponins,
and intermediate ﬁlaments) and metabolic
genes in spaceﬂown samples
Gene changes reproducible
across spaceﬂights
Zhao et al.34
SZ-8
Microarray
- 86 differentially expressed genes were
identiﬁed in response to space, and were
mainly related to oxidative phosphorylation
Microgravity was the main factor
to induce the biological effects
in the level of gene expressions,
rather than space radiation
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
3
iScience
Review

Table 1. Continued
Authors
Spaceﬂight
Mission/s
Omics Analysis
Platform
Key Outcomes
Take Home Message
Gao et al.35
SZ-8
Microarray
microRNA
microarray
- Spaceﬂight increased the number
of differentially expressed miRNAs
- Space conditions increased changes in the
expression of miRNAs that may impact
development, energy metabolism, apoptosis,
and signaling transduction
miRNAs are likely involved in
apoptosis during short-term
spaceﬂight
Gao et al.36
SZ-8
Microarray
microRNA
microarray
- Double the number of transcripts were
signiﬁcantly altered in the spaceﬂight
environment compared with space
radiation alone
- The majority of alterations were related
to protein amino acid dephosphorylation
and histidine metabolic and catabolic processes
- cel-miR-81, cel- miR-82, cel-miR-124,
and cel-miR-795 were predicted to
regulate DNA damage response
Microgravity, in the presence of
radiation, enhances the DNA
damage response in C. elegans
Xu et al.37
SZ-8
Microarray
microRNA
microarray
- 23 miRNAs were altered in spaceﬂight
- Most putative target genes of the
altered miRNAs were predicted to
be involved in developmental processes
- cel-miR-52, -55, and 56 of the miR-51
family were sensitive to space
environmental stressors
C. elegans respond to spaceﬂight
by altering miRNAs expression
Etheridge et al.38
CERISE
Microarray
microRNA
- The expression of the vast majority of
microRNAs is not affected by microgravity
- RNAi effectively silenced transgenic and
endogenous genes in the gonad
- RNAi against lysosomal protease genes
prevented muscle protein degradation
RNAi works as effectively in
the spaceﬂight environment as
on Earth within multiple tissues
Selch et al.39
ICE-FIRST
Microarray
- Normal developmental timing, apoptosis,
and DNA repair transcriptional signature
- Altered muscle development
transcriptional signature
- Spaceﬂown C. elegans undergo a metabolic
shift, which may be underlaid by insulin
and/or TGF-b signaling
C. elegans can be used to study
the effects of altered gravity
Higashibata
et al.40
ICE-FIRST
Microarray
- Microgravity upregulated genes
related to early embryogenesis
- Microgravity downregulated genes
related to locomotion
Microgravity regulates genes related
to locomotion, early embryogenesis,
and regeneration in C. elegans.
Higashibata
et al.16
ICE-FIRST
Microarray
- Myosin heavy chain isoforms in the
body wall muscles (isoforms A & B) and the
pharyngeal muscles (isoforms C & D)
decreased in expression in C. elegans
developed in space, relative to ground controls
- Expression of transcription factors
controlling the expression of the myosin
heavy chain isoforms was also decreased
- Genes encoding troponins and
tropomyosins were also decreased
C. elegans muscle development is
altered in spaceﬂight, which may
contribute to spaceﬂight-induced
muscle atrophy
CERISE, C. elegans RNAi Space Experiment; EDL, extensor digitorum longus; EPIENETICS, The effect of microgravity on the epigenetic modiﬁcation in
C. elegans; ICE-FIRST, FIRST International C. elegans Experiment in space; IGF-1, Insulin-like growth factor 1; ISS, International Space Station; MME, Molecular
Muscle Experiment; SZ-8, Shenzhou-8; TGF-b, transforming growth factor-beta.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review

RNA Interference in Space Experiment (CERISE), and Shenzhou-8 (SZ-8), have all found altered metabolism in
ﬂight (Figure 1). The ﬁrst investigation into the transcriptional responses in spaceﬂown worms was ICE-FIRST
in 2006. Using microarray analysis, the authors demonstrated a metabolic shift occurring mainly in the intes-
tines that could be underlaid by altered TGF-b and insulin signaling (Figure 1).39 Considering the possible
implications for altered endocrine signaling due to altered metabolism of lipids as well as alterations to innate
immunity, these changes to TGF-b and insulin signaling warrant further study.32,39
Just as microgravity is associated with consistent insulin signaling changes, simulated microgravity also
elicits reproducible insulin signaling changes. For example, a recent study looking at simulated micro-
gravity-exposed C. elegans found altered expression in the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway.26 Another
study found that simulated microgravity-exposed C. elegans demonstrated decreased expression of
linc-50, an intestinal long non-coding RNA which appears to target FoxO transcription factor DAF-16,
which is part of the insulin signaling pathway downstream of the insulin receptor/DAF-2.28
Another element of the ICE-FIRST effort was also the ﬁrst known proteomic investigation into spaceﬂown
C. elegans, which found that spaceﬂight reduced aconitase expression; a citric acid cycle enzyme respon-
sible for citrate-isocitrate conversion, which could affect ATP generation (Figure 1).41 Other studies have
demonstrated a similar pattern of alterations to genes and processes involved in the generation of ATP.
For example, one such study found 86 differentially expressed genes in response to spaceﬂight, which
were related to the process of mitochondrial respiration, which is the ﬁnal step of the process of cellular
respiration that generates ATP.34
Subsequent proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of spaceﬂown C. elegans from the 2009 CERISE exper-
iment also displayed alterations in metabolism on two fronts. First, the mitochondrial anchorage protein,
ANC-1, was found to have decreased levels of expression.33 ANC-1 is involved in nuclear anchorage and
positioning, as well as the positioning of mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum.43 Mutations to
ANC-1 negatively affect the health of C. elegans, with ANC-1 mutants displaying smaller body sizes,
changes to the shape of the nucleus, fragmentation of the endoplasmic reticulum, and movement of the
nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum during body movement.43 Second, multiple metabolic proteins in all
stages of cellular respiration, including glycolysis and the glyoxylate cycle, gluconeogenesis, and the elec-
tron transport chain, were found in signiﬁcantly reduced levels (Figure 1).33
The launch of the NASA GeneLab database21 and more recent initiatives such as the ESA-funded Space Omics
Topical Team23,24 has allowed access to vast amounts of spaceﬂight-related omics data, including that from
Table 2. Proteomic investigations of C. elegans in the context of microgravity
Authors
Spaceﬂight
Omics Analysis Platform
Key Outcomes
Take Home Message
Higashibata et al.33
CERISE
iTRAQ
- 16 upregulated proteins, with many related
to protein synthesis
- 43 downregulated proteins, many being
cytoskeletal and metabolic proteins
Protein changes
reproducible across
spaceﬂights
Higashibata et al.41
ICE-FIRST
2D gel electrophoresis
and MALDI-TOF MS
- 100 proteins identiﬁed
- Spaceﬂight reduced paramyosin and aconi-
tase expression
- Spaceﬂight
reduced
the
expression
of
troponin T, but increased the phosphory-
lation of troponin T
Spaceﬂight inﬂuenced the
expression of muscle-
related proteins
Higashibata et al.40
ICE-FIRST
2D gel electrophoresis
- >1000 total protein spots and 200 phos-
phoprotein spots detected
- 10%–15%
signiﬁcantly
increased
or
decreased in spaceﬂown samples
- Several phosphoprotein spots also signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in spaceﬂown samples
Spaceﬂight impacts
proteome
CERISE, C. elegans RNAi Space Experiment; ICE-FIRST, FIRST International C. elegans Experiment in space; ISS, International Space Station; iTRAQ, isobaric
tags for relative and absolute quantitation; MALDI-TOF, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of ﬂight; MME, Molecular Muscle Experiment; MS,
mass spectrometry; 2D, 2 dimensional.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
5
iScience
Review

C. elegans. Such access facilitates comparative omics investigations, that is using multiple datasets from
different conditions/species to identify reproducible omics proﬁles, maximizing the scientiﬁc return on invest-
ment. In one such comparative analysis, the authors aimed to understand whether the transcriptional proﬁles
of microgravity are the inverse of the hypergravity expression pattern, a hypothesis worthy of investigation
considering the divergent physiological adaptations to microgravity versus hypergravity.5 The authors found
that while most common gene signatures were similarly up- or downregulated, genes pertaining to the Gene
Ontology term ‘‘metabolic regulation’’ displayed opposing regulation, being upregulated in hypergravity and
downregulated in microgravity.5 Downstream network analysis identiﬁed a tyrosine degrading enzyme, hpd-1,
as the most highly connected hub gene providing a candidate for future therapeutic targeting.5
Research into similarities in the response to spaceﬂight between organisms has demonstrated that the sub-
sequent metabolic changes are not unique to C. elegans. One study used comparative omics to explore
spaceﬂight gene expression changes between Drosophila melanogaster and C. elegans in order to under-
stand how similarly or dissimilarly these organisms respond to spaceﬂight.42 Surprisingly, only 6 genes were
commonly downregulated in both organisms, several of which were associated with metabolic signaling,
although due to ortholog-related challenges the number of genes that could be compared was reduced
to roughly only 20% of the comparative genome.42
Examined together, all of the studies discussed previously demonstrate a clear pattern of metabolic
changes in response to spaceﬂight and microgravity, affecting primarily the mitochondria and the pro-
cesses involved in the generation of ATP. Decline in mitochondrial ATP production occurs naturally with
age, and mitochondrial dysfunction has been found in humans with a variety of health conditions, including
type 2 diabetes mellitus and insulin resistance.44 Further, mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked as be-
ing both a cause and consequence of muscle atrophy due to muscle disuse.45,46 These alterations in mito-
chondria could also partly explain phenotypes in other high energy-consuming tissues such as neurons.47
Therefore, understanding these metabolic changes induced in spaceﬂight contributes to understanding
the cause of muscle decline and alterations in other tissue systems observed in astronauts.
Table 3. Comparative omic investigations of C. elegans in the context of microgravity
Authors
Spaceﬂight
Mission/s
Omics Analysis
Platform
Key Outcomes
Take Home Message
Cahill et al.12
ICE-FIRST
Microarray
- C.
elegans
transcriptional
response
to
spaceﬂight demonstrates greater similarity
with mouse EDL (fast-twitch muscle)
compared to the soleus (slow-twitch mus-
cle)
- There was a similar increase in proliferation-
related genes, cAMP signaling
C. elegans results might be able to be
extrapolated to mammalian results
Willis et al.5
Microgravity:
ICE-FIRST
CERISE
Hypergravity
Microarray
- Most common gene signatures between
hypergravity and microgravity were simi-
larly upregulated (ubiquitin-mediated
catabolism, actin cytoskeleton regulation,
cell cycle processes) or downregulated
(immune system regulation)
- ‘‘Metabolic regulation’’ displayed opposing
regulation in response to hypergravity
versus microgravity
Hypergravity and microgravity
elicit neuronal and metabolic
adaptations
Leandro et al.42
ICE-FIRST
Microarray
- Only 6 genes were commonly downregu-
lated in C. elegans and Drosophila mela-
nogaster
- Although, the number of genes that could
be compared was reduced to only 20%
of the comparative genome, due to ortho-
log-related challenges
- The 6 genes were associated with meta-
bolic and neuromuscular signaling
Very few genes are commonly regulated
between C. elegans and Drosophila
melanogaster by spaceﬂight
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CERISE, C. elegans RNAi Space Experiment; EDL, extensor digitorum longus; ICE-FIRST, FIRST International
C. elegans Experiment in space.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review

Muscular and neuromuscular alterations in microgravity
Omics analysis of microgravity samples has also highlighted robust muscular and neuromuscular changes in
spaceﬂown C. elegans. For example, spaceﬂown C. elegans from ICE-FIRST were characterized by altered
muscle development, which was accompanied by corresponding declines in myosin heavy chain isoform
gene expression16 and locomotion-related genes (Figure 1).40 It should be noted that the ICE-FIRST exper-
iments were carried out in a chemically deﬁned medium, which permitted the study of the effects of surface
tension in spaceﬂight, but signiﬁcantly alters C. elegans development akin to dietary restriction.33,48 Proteo-
mic analysis from the same spaceﬂight mission (ICE-FIRST) found the core thick ﬁlament protein, paramyosin,
was reduced in spaceﬂown samples.41 Additionally, spaceﬂight reduced troponin T, which binds tropomyosin
and tethers the troponin complex to the thin ﬁlament, but increased troponin T phosphorylation.41 These
data suggest that these genes and proteins may play a key role in the maintenance of muscle structure
and function, and that their expressional change may be involved in spaceﬂight-induced muscle decline.
Utilizing quantitative isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation methodology, the follow-on
CERISE experiment found that spaceﬂown C. elegans displayed an increase in 16 proteins mostly related
to protein synthesis, including ribosomal proteins and translation elongation factors, and a decrease in 43
proteins, predominantly cytoskeletal, muscular, and mitochondrial related.33 Spaceﬂight-induced declines
in muscular (e.g., UNC-15 (paromysin)) and cytoskeletal (e.g., ACT-5 (actin)) gene and protein expression
have been shown, suggesting that the observed downregulation in these genes translates to reduced
expression of the encoded protein.33 Importantly, physiological declines, such as reduced body length
and altered movement, were also present suggesting these translational expression changes are physio-
logically meaningful. Of particular importance, the downregulation of myosin heavy chain and paramyosin
genes reproduced earlier proteomic observations,41 providing conﬁrmation that the observed proteomic
changes were indeed due to microgravity.
Two recent studies highlighted potential therapeutic avenues to target in order to offset muscle decline in
space. Sudevan et al. demonstrated that spaceﬂown C. elegans from 3 independent spaceﬂight missions consis-
tently displayed decreased comt-4 gene expression (Figure 1), which is a catechol-O-methyltransferase dopa-
mine degradation enzyme.27 Thus, targeting the dopamine system may be a viable and realistic therapeutic
to promote health in space. Another study found that simulated microgravity-exposed C. elegans which
A
B
Figure 1. Key insights from C. elegans space omics experiments
(A) Venn diagram depicting reproducible gene expression signatures from multiple microgravity experiments in C. elegans.
(B) A summary of the key ﬁndings from C. elegans space omics experiments.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
7
iScience
Review

overexpressed one of three miRNAs (mir-54, mir-354, or mir-2208) experienced a lower level of effect on loco-
motion behavior, suggesting miRNA expression may have a role in resisting the detrimental effects of
microgravity.30
Additionally, C. elegans shows potential as a model organism to explore the neuromuscular changes found in
other animals exposed to spaceﬂight and microgravity. In one comparative analysis study, it was demon-
strated that C. elegans transcriptional response to spaceﬂight demonstrates greater similarity with mouse
extensor digitorum longus (fast-twitch muscle) compared to the soleus (slow-twitch muscle).12 Consistent
with these observations, a shift from slow-twitch ﬁber toward fast-twitch ﬁber was seen in the soleus muscle
in spaceﬂown mice.49 This may suggest that C. elegans results can be extrapolated to mammalian results;
however, the caveat of this analysis is that whole C. elegans (i.e., muscle, neurons, gut, and reproductive tis-
sue) were utilized and so the transcriptional signature is not isolated to C. elegans muscle.12
There are also spaceﬂight experiments not yet published that are exploring neuromuscular changes during
spaceﬂight and generating transcriptomic datasets. For example, in 2018, there was the launch of the ﬁrst
UK-led experiment to the ISS, the Molecular Muscle Experiment (MME), which aims to demonstrate the precise
mechanisms underlying muscle decline in space and to explore the efﬁcacy of novel therapeutic interventions
aimed at insulin signaling and muscle attachment complexes for offsetting spaceﬂight-induced muscle
decline.50 More recently in 2021, there was the follow-up Molecular Muscle Experiment 2 (MME2), which aims
to conﬁrm past spaceﬂight-induced gene expression changes (i.e., MME) and trial the efﬁcacy of pharmacolog-
ical interventions aimed at improving mitochondrial health and neuromuscular signaling. Through collaboration
with NASA GeneLab, samples from MME and MME2 have been subjected to RNA-sequencing and are under-
going analysis.
Together, the research discussed previously has highlighted many muscular and neuromuscular alterations
in response to spaceﬂight and microgravity, providing the mechanistic basis for future studies of how
microgravity elicits muscle adaptations in C. elegans.33 Importantly, some of these reproducible gene
expression changes observed in spaceﬂown C. elegans, such as decreased myosin expression, are also
observed in rodents and humans.51 Thus, spaceﬂight-induced changes in C. elegans gene expression
are conserved in higher organisms and may explain the muscle decline observed in astronauts.
MicroRNA and epigenetic alterations in microgravity
Transcriptional understanding of spaceﬂight (patho)physiology has been built upon by researchers based
in China, following the SZ-8 mission. These authors focused on understanding the role of microRNAs (non-
coding RNAs that control gene expression via the destabilization of messenger RNA targets at the post-
transcriptional level and via translational inhibition) in response to microgravity and space radiation versus
space radiation in isolation.37 The authors found microRNAs that are altered in spaceﬂight,37 more so than
in response to radiation alone,35 are involved in developmental, DNA damage, apoptotic, and metabolic
responses.34–37 The authors found that microRNAs are involved in apoptotic gene expression due to the
stressors of spaceﬂight (Figure 1).36 Additionally, another study found that C. elegans exposed to micro-
gravity demonstrated greater non-coding RNA gene expression.31 The data from these studies suggest
that epigenetic changes occur with microgravity exposure.31
Microgravity has also been shown to alter DNA repair genes and the regulatory microRNAs. In a recent inte-
grative analysis combining transcriptional and microRNA datasets from 3 microgravity experiments that each
included spaceﬂight, spaceﬂight control with a 1-G centrifugal device, and ground control conditions, Zhao
and colleagues reported signiﬁcant alterations in the expression of DNA repair genes in response to micro-
gravity.52 Their integrative analysis approach allowed the identiﬁcation of microRNA’s as potential post-tran-
scriptional regulators that regulate the DNA repair gene expression in microgravity conditions. For example,
under spaceﬂight/ground control conditions, the authors reported that 6 differentially expressed miRNAs
(cel-miR-90, cel-miR-124, cel-miR-124, cel-miR-355, cel-miR-795, and cel-lsy-6) potentially regulate the ex-
pressions of 4 DNA repair genes (rfs-1, rcq-5, xpc-1, and mnat-1),52 demonstrating the power of omic analysis
to provide insight into the altered DNA response in microgravity conditions.
Considering robust transcriptional changes occur in spaceﬂown C. elegans, it has been suggested that
epigenetic changes may also occur since epigenetic modiﬁcations, such as DNA methylation and histone
modiﬁcations, regulate gene expression.29 Despite this sound hypothesis, research into the epigenetic
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review

responses of spaceﬂown C. elegans has only recently begun. In the only relevant study known to date, mi-
croarray analysis revealed that 39 genes expressed in C. elegans in response to microgravity are sup-
pressed by the action of HDA-4.29 This suggests that microgravity-induced transcriptional changes are
potentially, in part, epigenetically controlled, thus calling for further research into the epigenetic programs
underpinning microgravity adaptations, especially considering the potential heritability of any epigenetic
changes.53 The potential intergenerational effects of spaceﬂight have already been reported in mice,
where one study found that the offspring of space-traveled mice demonstrated altered expression of
genes in the liver.54 Further study will build a deeper understanding of the effects of microgravity on the
epigenome and the potential ramiﬁcations for any potential future offspring of spaceﬂown organisms
and astronauts.
INSIGHTS AND IMPACT OF C. ELEGANS SPACE OMICS WORK
As elucidated previously, space omics studies in C. elegans have generated several valuable insights on the
molecular regulation of spaceﬂight maladaptation which, in turn, stand to beneﬁcially impact future trans-
latable research efforts toward better understanding and counteracting spaceﬂight-induced health de-
clines. For instance, transcriptomic analyses highlight strong overlap of dysregulated genes in
C. elegans from different spaceﬂight missions, despite variant experimental factors.5,33 These reproducible
ﬁndings highlight the utility of C. elegans as a prime model organism for robust spaceﬂight omics investi-
gation and in particular future efforts aimed at ameliorating impaired molecular responses to spaceﬂight
(the MME and MME2 missions as two examples). Particularly evident from previous worm space omics
research are reproducible expression changes in neuronal/muscular and metabolic genes.5,33 Given that
worms in space might feasibly tract neuromuscular changes in gene expression of higher organisms in
space,12 omics work to date thus also pinpoints C. elegans as an especially valuable model for understand-
ing molecular causes of and developing countermeasures to declines in astronaut muscle health.
Interestingly, dysregulation of key muscle genes is evident even when spaceﬂown worms are compared to
onboard 1-G control worms,33 implicating that such expression changes are the consequence of micro-
gravity more so than increased radiation exposure. That mechanical load is the partial driver of muscle
changes in space is further supported by other previous worm space microarray analyses, wherein dystro-
phin (a highly mechanosensitive molecule that plays a key role in maintaining muscle structure/function)55
was shown to be important in the omics response to spaceﬂight, particularly with respect to neuromus-
cular/cytoskeletal changes.56 In fact, transcriptional changes in worms generally appear more widespread
in the spaceﬂight environment than with space radiations alone,35 with C. elegans work thus indicating that
microgravity is the more predominant effector of spaceﬂight omics changes. More speciﬁcally, the space
radiation dose on the ISS is 0.5–1 mSv per day, including 50 charged particles/sr/cm2 with high linear
energy transfer (>10 keV/mm).57–59 Since an adult nematode C. elegans is 1 mm long and 0.05 mm wide,
the probability of a direct hit by charged particles is relatively low. In addition, DNA damage by heavy par-
ticle radiation, not only ionizing radiation, is efﬁciently repaired in meiotic oocytes, which make up the ma-
jority of nematode adult gonads, because of their high homologous recombination activity.60,61 Thus, it is
challenging to precisely evaluate the effects of space radiation in omics analyses using a large number of
C. elegans cultured for a short period. Instead, the effects of space radiation on C. elegans are mainly stud-
ied by examining the frequency of mutations that can be observed in each individual nematode.8,62,63 Thus,
while it appears from studies in C. elegans that radiation exposure in lower Earth orbit is not a major
contributor to observed omics changes, the effects in higher mammals and humans, as well as the potential
effects beyond in lower Earth orbit and the protective effects of the Van Allen belts, render the conse-
quences of spaceﬂight radiation on omics/biology uncertain.
Omics work in spaceﬂown worms has also provided several important insights into upstream regulatory
mechanisms of spaceﬂight molecular responses. For example, microarray analysis of spaceﬂown
C. elegans implicates a prominence toward insulin signaling regulation of spaceﬂight-induced expression
changes39 that is likely to be partly driven by DAF-16/FoxO25—though more recent comparative transcrip-
tomic analyses of C. elegans suggest that FoxO regulation of gene expression may be a stress response to
altered gravity per se.5 Regardless, given that FoxO signaling is a highly conserved regulatory pathway
across species,64 such worm omics data should provide a strong basis to accelerate mechanistic under-
standing of poor spaceﬂight adaptations of higher organisms.5 Indeed, recent evidence supports insulin
signaling alterations during spaceﬂight in higher organisms, including both rodents and astronauts.65
Finally, more recent transcriptomic-driven analysis of spaceﬂown worms suggests that dopamine signaling
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
9
iScience
Review

is also perturbed with microgravity.27 Key implications and insights from C. elegans space omics work have
been further summarized in Figure 1.
NEXT FRONTIERS IN C. ELEGANS SPACE OMICS
Linking omics to phenotype
While understanding the molecular responses to microgravity in isolation are important, these will be more
informative if they quantitatively link to functional outcomes. Using informatic approaches, authors can,
and should, directly relate the C. elegans omics signatures to functional outcomes such as movement
rate and/or strength, to identify biologically important pathways and molecules regulating the phenotypic
responses to microgravity. Ideally, all of these analyses would be performed in the same animals to make
ﬁrm mechanistic links.33 Indeed, such ‘‘omics-phenotype’’ links have been made previously, albeit not in the
context of spaceﬂown C. elegans.66,67 This approach can also be taken toward the creation and application
of personalized medicine in the treatment of human disease. The potential use of C. elegans as a model
organism for personalized medicine is already being explored in various ways. One study explored using
C. elegans as a model for examining variations in metabolism between individuals via the application of
metabolomics and comparative genomics, demonstrating differences in the levels of several metabolites
between four strains of C. elegans.68 This demonstrates the use of C. elegans as a building block toward
understanding the differences in metabolism between individuals within a species.68
Integrated multi-omics
Without doubt, transcriptomics and proteomics are the most common omics analyses performed thus far in
C. elegans subjected to microgravity conditions. However, microgravity likely affects many other biological
layers, therefore the use of other omics can contribute to a more complete understanding of the effects of
spaceﬂight. For example, C. elegans-speciﬁc metabolomics and lipidomics methodologies are
emerging,69 providing additional and powerful omics capabilities to probe the pathophysiological effects
of spaceﬂight and reveal the potential of therapeutic interventions. These multiple omics approaches can
be integrated (i.e., at the computational analysis stage) to provide a comprehensive understanding of the
condition-speciﬁc crosstalk between different biological levels, therein providing a better understanding
of microgravity-inducing mechanisms and the identiﬁcation of novel candidates for therapeutic interven-
tion. Indeed, this approach has been taken in C. elegans to investigate responses to aging,70 starvation,71
and antibiotics,72 albeit not in the context of spaceﬂight.
Tissue-speciﬁc and spatial omics
It is notable that the majority of omics work to date has been generated using RNA/protein extracted from
whole worms containing all tissue types (i.e., muscles, gut, and neurons) as opposed to individual tissues,
and so the tissue-speciﬁc transcriptome/proteome responses to altered gravity are yet to be distin-
guished.5 Indeed, it is possible to isolate and sequence individual tissues derived from C. elegans,73
and since spaceﬂight can induced a wide variety of maladaptations across many organs, understanding tis-
sue-speciﬁc responses to microgravity is necessary in order to precisely underpin regulatory mechanisms
and develop targeted and effective countermeasures against spaceﬂight-induced maladaptations.
Further, conventional microarray and RNA-sequencing approaches do not provide spatial information, and
tissue-speciﬁc transcriptomics only partially solves this problem since it still takes into account ubiquitously
expressed genes (i.e., housekeeper genes).74 Spatial transcriptomics is an emerging method to overcome
these limitations, which combines RNA-sequencing with serial tissue sectioning75 to identify tissue-speciﬁc
spatiotemporal gene responses. By adapting the RNA tomography approach originally developed for ze-
braﬁsh,75 Ebbing and co-authors were able to successfully apply spatial transcriptomics to C. elegans,
which was considered a major challenge due to the limited amount of mRNA that can be extracted from
individual sections of small organisms.74 The authors individually froze and cryosectioned (20 mm)
C. elegans, followed by RNA extraction and processing using CEL-seq (to overcome the challenges of
low input).76 Using this combination of tools, the authors were able to detect an average of 16,394 genes
in young wild-type adult hermaphrodites, equating to 93% of genes detected in bulk RNA-sequencing ex-
periments,77 and they also demonstrated regional expression was highly indicative of function.74 Thus,
spatial transcriptomics offers a highly sensitive method to generate complex data, and develop deeper un-
derstanding of tissue organization, or disorganization, in disease. Spatial transcriptomics has been used to
create tissue atlases that have served not only particular use in creating detailed maps of the nervous
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review

system of mice but also furthered understanding of important topics in biology like heart development.78
Currently, the application of C. elegans spatial transcriptomics is in its infancy with only three publications
known to date,74,79,80 none of which have been conducted in the context of microgravity. Similarly, cell-spe-
ciﬁc proteomics methodologies that permit analysis of body wall muscles, neurons, and pharyngeal mus-
cles have been developed81 but are yet to be exploited in the context of microgravity.
In the absence of high-throughput spatiotemporal techniques, spatiotemporal insight is traditionally and
routinely gained in C. elegans through the utility of GFP.38,82 Capitalizing on the nematodes transparent
body, GFP is ‘‘tagged’’ to a gene/protein of interest to gain information on expression patterns and sub-
cellular localization in vivo. In the context of simulated microgravity, Zhao and colleagues demonstrated
the temporal induction of oxidative stress and the underlying mechanisms.82 In the context of microgravity,
the utility of GFP helped to demonstrate that treatment with RNAi works as effectively in space as it does on
Earth in multiple tissues.38 Most recently, as part of the MME, GFP was exploited to monitor neuronal re-
sponses to microgravity.47
In summary, despite the potential promise of these emerging methods for transforming our mechanistic
understanding of spaceﬂight (patho)physiology, these methods must be trialed for effectiveness in the
spaceﬂight environment, much like RNAi technology was.38
CONCLUSION
C. elegans represents a cheap and feasible organism to study the mechanisms regulating phenotypic ad-
aptations in response to microgravity. We highlight that the application of omics analysis to spaceﬂight
research has identiﬁed many ways that C. elegans respond to microgravity, at the level of the transcrip-
tome, proteome, and epigenome. Notably, microgravity elicits transcriptional responses with microgravity
robustly regulating genes related to muscle locomotion and metabolism (Figure 1). Similarly, proteomic
changes in microgravity represent robust declines in cytoskeletal and metabolic proteins, which may un-
derpin the pathophysiological phenotype associated with microgravity, particularly muscle decline. Impor-
tantly, these major transcriptional signatures are reproducible despite substantial differences in culturing
conditions. Future work should consider using emerging omics approaches, such as multi-omics and
spatial
transcriptomics,
to
unravel
tissue-speciﬁc
spatiotemporal
responses
to
microgravity
in
C. elegans. Where possible, such experiments should adopt, or at least consider, consortium-devised
omics-related working pipelines in order to standardize experimental design, such as those developed
by the International Standards for Space Omics Processing. In turn, this will facilitate future comparative
omics investigations, thus extracting as much insight as possible from rare space omics experiments.
This will lead to the identiﬁcation of the fundamental mechanisms regulating (mal)adaptations to micro-
gravity, beneﬁting health while in space and on Earth (e.g., aging, diabetes).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
T.E., N.J.S., and C.S.D. are members of the European Space Agency-funded Space Omics Topical Team,
funded by the ESA grant/contract 4000131202/20/NL/PG/pt ‘‘Space Omics: Toward an integrated ESA/
NASA –omics database for spaceﬂight and ground facilities experiments.’’ N.J.S. was supported by grants
from NASA [NSSC22K0250; NSSC22K0278] and acknowledges the support of the Osteopathic Heritage
Foundation through funding for the Osteopathic Heritage Foundation Ralph S. Licklider, D.O., Research
Endowment in the Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine. C.S.D. was supported by a Medical
Research Council Skills Development Fellowship (MR/T026014/1). For the purpose of open access, the
author has applied a ‘Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript
version arising.This study did not generate any new data.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.S., T.E., N.J.S., and C.S.D.: conception and design. A.S. and C.S.D.: original draft preparation. A.S.,
C.R.G.W., M.M., A.H., T.E., N.J.S., and C.S.D.: subsection contributions, review and editing. All authors
contributed to the ﬁnal approval of manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
11
iScience
Review

REFERENCES
1. Garrett-Bakelman, F.E., Darshi, M., Green,
S.J., Gur, R.C., Lin, L., Macias, B.R.,
McKenna, M.J., Meydan, C., Mishra, T.,
Nasrini, J., et al. (2019). The NASA Twins
Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-
long human spaceﬂight. Science 364,
eaau8650. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aau8650.
2. Vandenburgh, H., Chromiak, J., Shansky, J.,
Del Tatto, M., and Lemaire, J. (1999). Space
travel directly induces skeletal muscle
atrophy. Faseb. J. 13, 1031–1038. https://doi.
org/10.1096/fasebj.13.9.1031.
3. Mhatre, S.D., Iyer, J., Puukila, S., Paul, A.M.,
Tahimic, C.G.T., Rubinstein, L., Lowe, M.,
Alwood, J.S., Sowa, M.B., Bhattacharya, S.,
et al. (2022). Neuro-consequences of the
spaceﬂight environment. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 132, 908–935. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.09.055.
4. Mitchell, W.K., Williams, J., Atherton, P.,
Larvin, M., Lund, J., and Narici, M. (2012).
Sarcopenia, dynapenia, and the impact of
advancing age on human skeletal muscle size
and strength; a quantitative review. Front.
Physiol. 3, 260. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.
2012.00260.
5. Willis, C.R.G., Szewczyk, N.J., Costes, S.V.,
Udranszky, I.A., Reinsch, S.S., Etheridge, T.,
and Conley, C.A. (2020). Comparative
Transcriptomics Identiﬁes Neuronal and
Metabolic Adaptations to Hypergravity and
Microgravity in Caenorhabditis elegans.
iScience 23, 101734. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2020.101734.
6. Rutter, L., Barker, R., Bezdan, D., Cope, H.,
Costes, S.V., Degoricija, L., Fisch, K.M.,
Gabitto, M.I., Gebre, S., Giacomello, S., et al.
(2020). A New Era for Space Life Science:
International Standards for Space Omics
Processing. Patterns (N Y) 1, 100148. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2020.100148.
7. Corsi, A.K., Wightman, B., and Chalﬁe, M.
(2015). A Transparent Window into Biology: A
Primer on Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics
200, 387–407. https://doi.org/10.1534/
genetics.115.176099.
8. Nelson, G.A., Schubert, W.W., Kazarians,
G.A., Richards, G.F., Benton, E.V., Benton,
E.R., and Henke, R. (1994). Radiation effects in
nematodes: results from IML-1 experiments.
Adv. Space Res. 14, 87–91. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0273-1177(94)90455-3.
9. Nelson, G.A., Schubert, W.W., Kazarians,
G.A., and Richards, G.F. (1994). Development
and chromosome mechanics in nematodes:
results from IML-1. Adv. Space Res. 14,
209–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/0273-
1177(94)90405-7.
10. Szewczyk, N.J., Mancinelli, R.L., McLamb, W.,
Reed, D., Blumberg, B.S., and Conley, C.A.
(2005). Caenorhabditis elegans survives
atmospheric breakup of STS-107, space
shuttle Columbia. Astrobiology 5, 690–705.
https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2005.5.690.
11. Szewczyk, N.J., Kozak, E., and Conley, C.A.
(2003). Chemically deﬁned medium and
Caenorhabditis elegans. BMC Biotechnol. 3,
19. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6750-3-19.
12. Cahill, T., Cope, H., Bass, J.J., Overbey, E.G.,
Gilbert, R., da Silveira, W.A., Paul, A.M.,
Mishra, T., Herranz, R., Reinsch, S.S., et al.
(2021). Mammalian and Invertebrate Models
as Complementary Tools for Gaining
Mechanistic Insight on Muscle Responses to
Spaceﬂight. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 9470. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijms22179470.
13. Lai, C.H., Chou, C.Y., Ch’ang, L.Y., Liu, C.S.,
and Lin, W. (2000). Identiﬁcation of novel
human genes evolutionarily conserved in
Caenorhabditis elegans by comparative
proteomics. Genome Res. 10, 703–713.
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.10.5.703.
14. Markaki, M., and Tavernarakis, N. (2010).
Modeling human diseases in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Biotechnol. J. 5, 1261–1276. https://
doi.org/10.1002/biot.201000183.
15. Oczypok, E.A., Etheridge, T., Freeman, J.,
Stodieck, L., Johnsen, R., Baillie, D., and
Szewczyk, N.J. (2012). Remote automated
multi-generational growth and observation of
an animal in low Earth orbit. J. R. Soc.
Interface 9, 596–599. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsif.2011.0716.
16. Higashibata, A., Szewczyk, N.J., Conley, C.A.,
Imamizo-Sato, M., Higashitani, A., and
Ishioka, N. (2006). Decreased expression of
myogenic transcription factors and myosin
heavy chains in Caenorhabditis elegans
muscles developed during spaceﬂight.
J. Exp. Biol. 209, 3209–3218. https://doi.org/
10.1242/jeb.02365.
17. Trappe, S., Costill, D., Gallagher, P., Creer, A.,
Peters, J.R., Evans, H., Riley, D.A., and Fitts,
R.H. (2009). Exercise in space: human skeletal
muscle after 6 months aboard the
International Space Station. J. Appl. Physiol.
106, 1159–1168. https://doi.org/10.1152/
japplphysiol.91578.2008.
18. Hasin, Y., Seldin, M., and Lusis, A. (2017).
Multi-omics approaches to disease. Genome
Biol. 18, 83. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-
017-1215-1.
19. Schmidt, M.A., and Goodwin, T.J. (2013).
Personalized medicine in human space ﬂight:
using Omics based analyses to develop
individualized countermeasures that enhance
astronaut safety and performance.
Metabolomics 9, 1134–1156. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11306-013-0556-3.
20. Karahalil, B. (2016). Overview of Systems
Biology and Omics Technologies. Curr. Med.
Chem. 23, 4221–4230. https://doi.org/10.
2174/0929867323666160926150617.
21. Ray, S., Gebre, S., Fogle, H., Berrios, D.C.,
Tran, P.B., Galazka, J.M., and Costes, S.V.
(2019). GeneLab: Omics database for
spaceﬂight experiments. Bioinformatics 35,
1753–1759. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty884.
22. Beheshti, A., Cekanaviciute, E., Smith, D.J.,
and Costes, S.V. (2018). Global transcriptomic
analysis suggests carbon dioxide as an
environmental stressor in spaceﬂight: A
systems biology GeneLab case study. Sci.
Rep. 8, 4191. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
018-22613-1.
23. Madrigal, P., Gabel, A., Villacampa, A.,
Manzano, A., Deane, C.S., Bezdan, D.,
Carnero-Diaz, E., Medina, F.J., Hardiman, G.,
Grosse, I., et al. (2020). Revamping Space-
omics in Europe. Cell Syst. 11, 555–556.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.10.006.
24. Deane, C.S., Space Omics Topical Team, da
Silveira, W.A., and Herranz, R. (2022). Space
omics research in Europe: Contributions,
geographical distribution and ESA member
state funding schemes. iScience 25, 103920.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.103920.
25. Honda, Y., Honda, S., Narici, M., and
Szewczyk, N.J. (2014). Spaceﬂight and
ageing: reﬂecting on Caenorhabditis elegans
in space. Gerontology 60, 138–142. https://
doi.org/10.1159/000354772.
26. Celen, I., Jayasinghe, A., Doh, J.H., and
Sabanayagam, C.R. (2023). Transcriptomic
Signature of the Simulated Microgravity
Response in Caenorhabditis elegans and
Comparison to Spaceﬂight Experiments.
Cells 12. https://doi.org/10.3390/
cells12020270.
27. Sudevan, S., Muto, K., Higashitani, N.,
Hashizume, T., Higashibata, A., Ellwood, R.A.,
Deane, C.S., Rahman, M., Vanapalli, S.A.,
Etheridge, T., et al. (2022). Loss of physical
contact in space alters the dopamine system
in C. elegans. iScience 25, 103762. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.103762.
28. Sun, L., Li, D., Yuan, Y., and Wang, D. (2021).
Intestinal long non-coding RNAs in response
to simulated microgravity stress in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Rep. 11, 1997.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-81619-4.
29. Higashitani, A., Hashizume, T., Takiura, M.,
Higashitani, N., Teranishi, M., Oshima, R.,
Yano, S., Kuriyama, K., and Higashibata, A.
(2021). Histone deacetylase HDA-4-mediated
epigenetic regulation in space-ﬂown C.
elegans. NPJ Microgravity 7, 33. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41526-021-00163-7.
30. Sun, L., Li, W., Li, D., and Wang, D. (2020).
microRNAs involved in the control of toxicity
on locomotion behavior induced by
simulated microgravity stress in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Rep. 10, 17510.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-74582-z.
31. Tee, L.F., Neoh, H.M., Then, S.M., Murad,
N.A., Asillam, M.F., Hashim, M.H., Nathan, S.,
and Jamal, R. (2017). Effects of simulated
microgravity on gene expression and
biological phenotypes of a single generation
Caenorhabditis elegans cultured on 2
different media. Life Sci. Space Res. 15,
11–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2017.
06.002.
32. Gao, Y., Xu, D., Zhao, L., and Sun, Y. (2017).
The DNA damage response of C. elegans
affected by gravity sensing and
radiosensitivity during the Shenzhou-8
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review

spaceﬂight. Mutat. Res. 795, 15–26. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2017.01.001.
33. Higashibata, A., Hashizume, T., Nemoto, K.,
Higashitani, N., Etheridge, T., Mori, C.,
Harada, S., Sugimoto, T., Szewczyk, N.J.,
Baba, S.A., et al. (2016). Microgravity elicits
reproducible alterations in cytoskeletal and
metabolic gene and protein expression in
space-ﬂown Caenorhabditis elegans. NPJ
Microgravity 2, 15022. https://doi.org/10.
1038/npjmgrav.2015.22.
34. Zhao, L., Gao, Y., Mi, D., and Sun, Y. (2016).
Mining potential biomarkers associated with
space ﬂight in Caenorhabditis elegans
experienced Shenzhou-8 mission with
multiple feature selection techniques. Mutat.
Res. 791–792, 27–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mrfmmm.2016.08.002.
35. Gao, Y., Xu, D., Zhao, L., Zhang, M., and Sun,
Y. (2015). Effects of microgravity on DNA
damage response in Caenorhabditis elegans
during Shenzhou-8 spaceﬂight. Int. J. Radiat.
Biol. 91, 531–539. https://doi.org/10.3109/
09553002.2015.1043754.
36. Gao, Y., Li, S., Xu, D., Wang, J., and Sun, Y.
(2015). Changes in apoptotic microRNA and
mRNA expression proﬁling in Caenorhabditis
elegans during the Shenzhou-8 mission.
J. Radiat. Res. 56, 872–882. https://doi.org/
10.1093/jrr/rrv050.
37. Xu, D., Gao, Y., Huang, L., and Sun, Y. (2014).
Changes in miRNA expression proﬁle of
space-ﬂown Caenorhabditis elegans during
Shenzhou-8 mission. Life Sci. Space Res. 1,
44–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2013.
12.001.
38. Etheridge, T., Nemoto, K., Hashizume, T.,
Mori, C., Sugimoto, T., Suzuki, H., Fukui, K.,
Yamazaki, T., Higashibata, A., Szewczyk, N.J.,
and Higashitani, A. (2011). The effectiveness
of RNAi in Caenorhabditis elegans is
maintained during spaceﬂight. PLoS One 6,
e20459. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0020459.
39. Selch, F., Higashibata, A., Imamizo-Sato, M.,
Higashitani, A., Ishioka, N., Szewczyk, N.J.,
and Conley, C.A. (2008). Genomic response
of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to
spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Res. 41, 807–815.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2007.11.015.
40. Higashibata, A., Higashitani, A., Adachi, R.,
Kagawa, H., Honda, S., Honda, Y.,
Higashitani, N., Sasagawa, Y., Miyazawa, Y.,
Szewczyk, N.J., et al. (2007). Biochemical and
Molecular Biological Analyses of space-ﬂown
nematodes in Japan, the First International
Caenorhabditis elegans Experiment (ICE-
First). Microgravity Sci. Technol. 19, 159–163.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02919473.
41. Higashibata, A., Higashitani, N., Imamizo-
Sato, M., Hashizume, T., Etheridge, T.,
Szewczyk, N., Higashitani, A., and Ishioka, N.
(2013). Space Flight Induces Reduction of
Paramyosin and Troponin T: Proteomic
Analysis of Space-Flown Caenorhabditis
elegans. Curr. Biotechnol. 2, 262–271. https://
doi.org/10.2174/22115501113029990015.
42. Leandro, L.J., Szewczyk, N.J., Bengurı´a, A.,
Herranz, R., Lava´n, D., Medina, F.J., Gasset,
G., Loon, J.V., Conley, C.A., and Marco, R.
(2007). Comparative analysis of Drosophila
melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans
gene expression experiments in the
European Soyuz ﬂights to the International
Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 40, 506–512.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2007.05.070.
43. Hao, H., Kalra, S., Jameson, L.E., Guerrero,
L.A., Cain, N.E., Bolivar, J., and Starr, D.A.
(2021). The Nesprin-1/-2 ortholog ANC-1
regulates organelle positioning in C. elegans
independently from its KASH or actin-binding
domains. Elife 10, e61069. https://doi.org/10.
7554/eLife.61069.
44. Johannsen, D.L., and Ravussin, E. (2009). The
role of mitochondria in health and disease.
Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 9, 780–786. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2009.09.002.
45. Hyatt, H., Deminice, R., Yoshihara, T., and
Powers, S.K. (2019). Mitochondrial
dysfunction induces muscle atrophy during
prolonged inactivity: A review of the causes
and effects. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 662,
49–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2018.
11.005.
46. Deane, C.S., Willis, C.R.G., Phillips, B.E.,
Atherton, P.J., Harries, L.W., Ames, R.M.,
Szewczyk, N.J., and Etheridge, T. (2021).
Transcriptomic meta-analysis of disuse
muscle atrophy vs. resistance exercise-
induced hypertrophy in young and older
humans. J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 12,
629–645. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.
12706.
47. Laranjeiro, R., Harinath, G., Pollard, A.K.,
Gaffney, C.J., Deane, C.S., Vanapalli, S.A.,
Etheridge, T., Szewczyk, N.J., and Driscoll, M.
(2021). Spaceﬂight affects neuronal
morphology and alters transcellular
degradation of neuronal debris in adult
Caenorhabditis elegans. iScience 24, 102105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102105.
48. Szewczyk, N.J., Udranszky, I.A., Kozak, E.,
Sunga, J., Kim, S.K., Jacobson, L.A., and
Conley, C.A. (2006). Delayed development
and lifespan extension as features of
metabolic lifestyle alteration in C. elegans
under dietary restriction. J. Exp. Biol. 209,
4129–4139. https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.
02492.
49. Okada, R., Fujita, S.I., Suzuki, R., Hayashi, T.,
Tsubouchi, H., Kato, C., Sadaki, S., Kanai, M.,
Fuseya, S., Inoue, Y., et al. (2021).
Transcriptome analysis of gravitational
effects on mouse skeletal muscles under
microgravity and artiﬁcial 1 g onboard
environment. Sci. Rep. 11, 9168. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-021-88392-4.
50. Pollard, A.K., Gaffney, C.J., Deane, C.S.,
Balsamo, M., Cooke, M., Ellwood, R.A.,
Hewitt, J.E., Mierzwa, B.E., Mariani, A.,
Vanapalli, S.A., et al. (2020). Molecular Muscle
Experiment: Hardware and Operational
Lessons for Future Astrobiology Space
Experiments. Astrobiology 20, 935–943.
https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2019.2181.
51. Reeves, N.J., Maganaris, C.N., Ferretti, G.,
and Narici, M.V. (2002). Inﬂuence of simulated
microgravity on human skeletal muscle
architecture and function. J. Gravitational
Physiol. 9, P153–P154.
52. Zhao, L., Zhang, G., Tang, A., Huang, B., and
Mi, D. (2023). Microgravity alters the
expressions of DNA repair genes and their
regulatory miRNAs in space-ﬂown
Caenorhabditis elegans. Life Sci. Space Res.
37, 25–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2023.
02.002.
53. Turner, B.M. (2009). Epigenetic responses to
environmental change and their evolutionary
implications. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 364, 3403–3418. https://doi.org/10.
1098/rstb.2009.0125.
54. Yoshida, K., Fujita, S.I., Isotani, A., Kudo, T.,
Takahashi, S., Ikawa, M., Shiba, D., Shirakawa,
M., Muratani, M., and Ishii, S. (2021).
Intergenerational effect of short-term
spaceﬂight in mice. iScience 24, 102773.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102773.
55. Hughes, D.C., Marcotte, G.R., Marshall, A.G.,
West, D.W.D., Baehr, L.M., Wallace, M.A.,
Saleh, P.M., Bodine, S.C., and Baar, K. (2017).
Age-related Differences in Dystrophin:
Impact on Force Transfer Proteins,
Membrane Integrity, and Neuromuscular
Junction Stability. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci.
Med. Sci. 72, 640–648. https://doi.org/10.
1093/gerona/glw109.
56. Xu, D., Gao, Y., Guo, L., Lin, C., and Sun, Y.
(2018). Effect of dys-1 mutation on gene
expression proﬁle in space-ﬂown
Caenorhabditis elegans. Muscle Nerve.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.26076.
57. Ohnishi, T., Takahashi, A., Nagamatsu, A.,
Omori, K., Suzuki, H., Shimazu, T., and
Ishioka, N. (2009). Detection of space
radiation-induced double strand breaks as a
track in cell nucleus. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 390, 485–488. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.bbrc.2009.09.114.
58. Kodaira, S., Kawashima, H., Kitamura, H.,
Kurano, M., Uchihori, Y., Yasuda, N., Ogura,
K., Kobayashi, I., Suzuki, A., Koguchi, Y., et al.
(2013). Analysis of radiation dose variations
measured by passive dosimeters onboard the
International Space Station during the solar
quiet period (2007–2008). Radiat. Meas. 49,
95–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radmeas.
2012.11.020.
59. Nagamatsu, A., Murakami, K., Kitajo, K.,
Shimada, K., Kumagai, H., and Tawara, H.
(2013). Area radiation monitoring on ISS
Increments 17 to 22 using PADLES in the
Japanese Experiment Module Kibo. Radiat.
Meas. 59, 84–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
radmeas.2013.05.008.
60. Takanami, T., Mori, A., Takahashi, H., and
Higashitani, A. (2000). Hyper-resistance of
meiotic cells to radiation due to a strong
expression of a single recA-like gene in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Nucleic Acids Res.
28, 4232–4236. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
28.21.4232.
61. Takanami, T., Zhang, Y., Aoki, H., Abe, T.,
Yoshida, S., Takahashi, H., Horiuchi, S., and
Higashitani, A. (2003). Efﬁcient repair of DNA
damage induced by heavy ion particles in
meiotic prophase I nuclei of Caenorhabditis
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
13
iScience
Review

elegans. J. Radiat. Res. 44, 271–276. https://
doi.org/10.1269/jrr.44.271.
62. Hartman, P.S., Hlavacek, A., Wilde, H.,
Lewicki, D., Schubert, W., Kern, R.G.,
Kazarians, G.A., Benton, E.V., Benton, E.R.,
and Nelson, G.A. (2001). A comparison of
mutations induced by accelerated iron
particles versus those induced by low earth
orbit space radiation in the FEM-3 gene of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Mutat. Res. 474,
47–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0027-
5107(00)00154-8.
63. Zhao, Y., Lai, K., Cheung, I., Youds, J., Tarailo,
M., Tarailo, S., and Rose, A. (2006). A
mutational analysis of Caenorhabditis
elegans in space. Mutat. Res. 601, 19–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2006.
05.001.
64. Webb, A.E., Kundaje, A., and Brunet, A.
(2016). Characterization of the direct targets
of FOXO transcription factors throughout
evolution. Aging Cell 15, 673–685. https://
doi.org/10.1111/acel.12479.
65. Mathyk, B.A., Tabetah, M., Karim, R., Zaksas,
V., Kim, J., I, A., Muratani, M., Tasoula, A.,
Singh, R., Chen, Y.-K., et al. (2023).
Spaceﬂight alters insulin and estrogen
signaling pathways. Research Square.
66. Willis, C.R.G., Ames, R.M., Deane, C.S.,
Phillips, B.E., Boereboom, C.L., Abdulla, H.,
Bukhari, S.S.I., Lund, J.N., Williams, J.P.,
Wilkinson, D.J., et al. (2020). Network analysis
of human muscle adaptation to aging and
contraction. Aging (Albany NY) 12, 740–755.
https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.102653.
67. Willis, C.R.G., Gallagher, I.J., Wilkinson, D.J.,
Brook, M.S., Bass, J.J., Phillips, B.E., Smith, K.,
Etheridge, T., Stokes, T., McGlory, C., et al.
(2021). Transcriptomic links to muscle mass
loss and declines in cumulative muscle
protein synthesis during short-term disuse in
healthy younger humans. Faseb. J. 35,
e21830. https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.
202100276RR.
68. Fox, B.W., Ponomarova, O., Lee, Y.U., Zhang,
G., Giese, G.E., Walker, M., Roberto, N.M.,
Na, H., Rodrigues, P.R., Curtis, B.J., et al.
(2022). C. elegans as a model for inter-
individual variation in metabolism. Nature
607, 571–577. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-022-04951-3.
69. Molenaars, M., Schomakers, B.V., Elfrink, H.L.,
Gao, A.W., Vervaart, M.A.T., Pras-Raves, M.L.,
Luyf, A.C., Smith, R.L., Sterken, M.G.,
Kammenga, J.E., et al. (2021). Metabolomics
and lipidomics in Caenorhabditis elegans
using a single-sample preparation. Dis.
Model. Mech. 14, dmm047746. https://doi.
org/10.1242/dmm.047746.
70. Hastings, J., Mains, A., Virk, B., Rodriguez, N.,
Murdoch, S., Pearce, J., Bergmann, S., Le
Nove` re, N., and Casanueva, O. (2019). Multi-
Omics and Genome-Scale Modeling Reveal a
Metabolic Shift During C. elegans Aging.
Front. Mol. Biosci. 6, 2. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmolb.2019.00002.
71. Harvald, E.B., Sprenger, R.R., Dall, K.B.,
Ejsing, C.S., Nielsen, R., Mandrup, S., Murillo,
A.B., Larance, M., Gartner, A., Lamond, A.I.,
and Færgeman, N.J. (2017). Multi-omics
Analyses of Starvation Responses Reveal a
Central Role for Lipoprotein Metabolism in
Acute Starvation Survival in C. elegans. Cell
Syst. 5, 38–52.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cels.2017.06.004.
72. Gao, A.W., El Alam, G., Lalou, A., Li, T.Y.,
Molenaars, M., Zhu, Y., Overmyer, K.A.,
Shishkova, E., Hof, K., Bou Sleiman, M., et al.
(2022). Multi-omics analysis identiﬁes
essential regulators of mitochondrial stress
response in two wild-type C. elegans strains.
iScience 25, 103734. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2022.103734.
73. Kaletsky, R., Yao, V., Williams, A., Runnels,
A.M., Tadych, A., Zhou, S., Troyanskaya, O.G.,
and Murphy, C.T. (2018). Transcriptome
analysis of adult Caenorhabditis elegans cells
reveals tissue-speciﬁc gene and isoform
expression. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007559.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.
1007559.
74. Ebbing, A., Ve´ rtesy, A´ ., Betist, M.C.,
Spanjaard, B., Junker, J.P., Berezikov, E., van
Oudenaarden, A., and Korswagen, H.C.
(2018). Spatial Transcriptomics of C. elegans
Males and Hermaphrodites Identiﬁes Sex-
Speciﬁc Differences in Gene Expression
Patterns. Dev. Cell 47, 801–813.e6. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2018.10.016.
75. Junker, J.P., Noe¨ l, E.S., Guryev, V., Peterson,
K.A., Shah, G., Huisken, J., McMahon, A.P.,
Berezikov, E., Bakkers, J., and van
Oudenaarden, A. (2014). Genome-wide RNA
Tomography in the zebraﬁsh embryo. Cell
159, 662–675. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2014.09.038.
76. Gru¨ n, D., Kester, L., and van Oudenaarden, A.
(2014). Validation of noise models for single-
cell transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 11,
637–640. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.2930.
77. Kim, B., Suo, B., and Emmons, S.W. (2016).
Gene Function Prediction Based on
Developmental Transcriptomes of the Two
Sexes in C. elegans. Cell Rep. 17, 917–928.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.09.051.
78. Rao, A., Barkley, D., Franc¸a, G.S., and Yanai, I.
(2021). Exploring tissue architecture using
spatial transcriptomics. Nature 596, 211–220.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03634-9.
79. Ro¨ delsperger, C., Ebbing, A., Sharma, D.R.,
Okumura, M., Sommer, R.J., and Korswagen,
H.C. (2021). Spatial Transcriptomics of
Nematodes Identiﬁes Sperm Cells as a
Source of Genomic Novelty and Rapid
Evolution. Mol. Biol. Evol. 38, 229–243.
https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msaa207.
80. Schild, E.S., Mars, J., Ebbing, A., Vivie´ , J.,
Betist, M., and Korswagen, H.C. (2021).
Spatial transcriptomics of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans using RNA
tomography. STAR Protoc. 2, 100411. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.xpro.2021.100411.
81. Yuet, K.P., Doma, M.K., Ngo, J.T.,
Sweredoski, M.J., Graham, R.L.J., Moradian,
A., Hess, S., Schuman, E.M., Sternberg, P.W.,
and Tirrell, D.A. (2015). Cell-speciﬁc
proteomic analysis in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 2705–
2710. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1421567112.
82. Zhao, L., Rui, Q., and Wang, D. (2017).
Molecular basis for oxidative stress induced
by simulated microgravity in nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Total Environ.
607–608, 1381–1390. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.scitotenv.2017.07.088.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
iScience 26, 107189, July 21, 2023
iScience
Review
