Citation: An, R.; Lee, J.A. CAMDLES:
CFD-DEM Simulation of Microbial
Communities in Spaceﬂight and
Artiﬁcial Microgravity. Life 2022, 12,
660. https://doi.org/10.3390/
life12050660
Academic Editors: Luis Zea, Sergio
Santa María and Marta Cortesao
Received: 19 March 2022
Accepted: 22 April 2022
Published: 29 April 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
life
Article
CAMDLES: CFD-DEM Simulation of Microbial Communities
in Spaceﬂight and Artiﬁcial Microgravity
Rocky An 1,2,*
and Jessica Audrey Lee 3,*
1
Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
2
Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
3
Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
*
Correspondence: ra474@cornell.edu (R.A.); jessica.a.lee@nasa.gov (J.A.L.)
Abstract: We present CAMDLES (CFD-DEM Artiﬁcial Microgravity Developments for Living
Ecosystem Simulation), an extension of CFDEM®Coupling to model biological ﬂows, growth, and
mass transfer in artiﬁcial microgravity devices. For microbes that accompany humans into space,
microgravity-induced alterations in the ﬂuid environment are likely to be a major factor in the
microbial experience of spaceﬂight. Computational modeling is needed to investigate how well
ground-based microgravity simulation methods replicate that experience. CAMDLES incorporates
agent-based modeling to study inter-species metabolite transport within microbial communities in
rotating wall vessel bioreactors (RWVs). Preexisting CFD modeling of RWVs has not yet incorporated
growth; CAMDLES employs the simultaneous modeling of biological, chemical, and mechanical
processes in a micro-scale rotating reference frame environment. Simulation mass transfer calcu-
lations were correlated with Monod dynamic parameters to predict relative growth rates between
artiﬁcial microgravity, spaceﬂight microgravity, and 1 g conditions. By simulating a microbial model
community of metabolically cooperative strains of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica, we found
that the greatest difference between microgravity and an RWV or 1 g gravity was when species
colocalized in dense aggregates. We also investigated the inﬂuence of other features of the system on
growth, such as spatial distribution, product yields, and diffusivity. Our simulation provides a basis
for future laboratory experiments using this community for investigation in artiﬁcial microgravity
and spaceﬂight microgravity. More broadly, our development of these models creates a framework
for novel hypothesis generation and design of biological experiments with RWVs, coupling the effects
of RWV size, rotation rate, and mass transport directly to bacterial growth in microbial communities.
Keywords: microgravity; clinostat; rotating wall vessel; microbial community; population dynamics;
computational ﬂuid dynamics; CFD-DEM
1. Introduction
1.1. Microbial Communities in Space
Microbial communities are an integral part of space exploration: they accompany
human crew in habitats such as the International Space Station [1] and they will ultimately
be used for bioregenerative life support [2], food and pharmaceuticals production [3], and
in situ resource utilization [4]. Like all organisms, microbes experience stress in the space
environment: studies have documented changes in virulence, antimicrobial resistance, and
population diversity [5,6]. However, the mechanisms by which spaceﬂight induces these
responses remain poorly understood. Many of the processes documented for multicellular
organisms, such as mitochondrial dysregulation and mechanical unloading [7], do not
apply to single-celled organisms; moreover, microorganisms almost invariably live in
communities, but few studies of any organisms at any scale have investigated the effects of
space conditions on interspecies interactions. Understanding the microbial space response
requires an approach that considers the interactions between microbial cells and their
environments at relevant spatial scales.
Life 2022, 12, 660. https://doi.org/10.3390/life12050660
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/life

Life 2022, 12, 660
2 of 21
1.2. Validating Clinostats for Accurate Artiﬁcial Microgravity Conditions
Of the stressors present in the spaceﬂight environment, altered gravity is the feature
most likely to affect microorganisms in habitable environments, such as a spacecraft. It is
also the feature most difﬁcult to replicate in ground studies. Since spaceﬂight experiments
are costly, logistically difﬁcult, and inaccessible to many researchers, artiﬁcial microgravity
devices, such as clinostats and rotating wall vessel (RWV) bioreactors, are commonly
used to replicate microgravity conditions. An RWV is a type of clinostat that is used
for cell culture: they are cylindrical culture vessels ﬁlled with liquid culture medium
that constantly rotate the ﬂuid environment, keeping cells in suspension by continuously
changing the orientation of the gravity vector [8,9]. However, there is a fundamental
difference between microbial cells and larger organisms in the way that rotation is used to
simulate microgravity. For plants grown in clinostats, the constant rotation of the gravity
vector results in an average gravity vector of zero over time. For microbial cells, which
are believed to be unable to sense gravity directly, it is the ability of the RWV to mimic the
unique ﬂuid environment of microgravity that is likely its most important feature [10–15].
Understanding the ﬂuid dynamics of the RWV is therefore critical for conducting rigorous
research into the effects of spaceﬂight on microorganisms.
1.3. The Microgravity Fluid Environment
The loss of natural convection in microgravity causes the ﬂuid environment to be
quiescent. Likewise, the idealized RWV ﬂuid environment is under solid-body rotation,
with minimal ﬂuid shear and turbulence [8]. However, a disparity is observed in the cellular
response when comparing RWV and microgravity conditions, which may be caused by
a complex set of factors, including hardware effects, mechanotransduction, and nutrient
stress [16,17]. RWVs also exhibit centrifugal sedimentation of cell aggregates, resulting
in localization that is different from that found in true microgravity [8]. There are very
few commercially available bioreactors; therefore, they are often custom-designed by
researchers and unique to each researcher’s experiment. A general lack of knowledge about
accurate RWV conditions is a problem that may be one of the sources of contradictory
conclusions about the effect of microgravity among cell biological circles, assuming there
even is a uniﬁed microgravity response on bacterial cells at all [18,19].
1.4. The Effect of Microgravity on Microbial Ecology
The interaction between the phases—that is, how microbial cells alter their ﬂuid
environment and vice versa—is especially important for understanding the behavior of
multispecies microbial communities in space. No microbial species lives in isolation.
Microorganisms form communities in which different species interact in numerous ways,
and one of the interactions most commonly documented is the exchange of metabolites used
for growth, often called cross-feeding [6,20]. In a quiescent microgravity ﬂuid environment,
reduced mixing could lead to a reduced exchange of metabolites, which, in turn, would
shift community dynamics. Although a few microbial community experiments have been
done in artiﬁcial microgravity [21], there are no previous studies that attempt to validate
computational models for a quantitative understanding of microbial community dynamics
in these devices. Numerous computational ﬂuid dynamics studies on the macro-scale have
been done to validate the ability of clinostats and RWV’s to produce the desired quiescent
ﬂuidic environment, but the scope of these studies often includes the ﬂuid phase only, or
solid parcel fractions, without metabolite scalar transport [22–27]. We sought to ﬁll this
gap by building a computational model that integrates both ﬂuid and particle dynamics
with biological metabolism and growth to generate predictions of microbial community
dynamics in 1 g, microgravity, and RWV conditions. As an initial demonstration, we
modeled a community composed of two obligately cross-feeding bacterial species that were
previously studied and modeled extensively [20,28–30].

Life 2022, 12, 660
3 of 21
1.5. Agent-Based Models for Microbial Communities
Agent-based models, also known as individual-based models, operate at the resolution
of the individual cell. Each agent, i.e., bacterial cell, is given certain rules to follow, placed
in an environment, and expected to interact with that environment as well as with other
agents. Complex interactions between agents, distributions, and patterns arise from these
models, and they are essential for the modeling of microbial communities. Computational
agent-based models in the microbial ecology ﬁeld are actively being developed; one of the
latest scientiﬁc agent-based simulations is NUFEB [31], which features biological growth
kinetics and coupled ﬂuid–solid interaction, but not solute scalar transport.
To apply the principles of agent-based modeling to spaceﬂight and artiﬁcial micro-
gravity, we present CAMDLES (CFD-DEM Artiﬁcial Microgravity Developments for Living
Ecosystem Simulation), which is an additional package for established, non-biological
CFD-DEM software. It is based on the open-source software CFDEM®Coupling [32] and
LIGGGHTS® [33], and it brings CFD-DEM modeling capability to RWVs. CAMDLES
features include a rotating reference frame simulation environment, the buoyant Boussi-
nesq approximation for natural convective ﬂows, and Monod kinetic metabolic models for
calculation of biological growth rates. CAMDLES is also the ﬁrst agent-based model that
directly couples metabolism to mass transfer.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Software Development
CAMDLES is dependent on parent software packages to run simulations. Installation
involves the addition of the package into the source code of the packages LIGGGHTS®
and CFDEM®Coupling. CAMDLES-speciﬁc scripts are provided in Supplementary File
S1. Table 1 and Figure 1 describe the parent software and relevant software packages. The
parent packages are all written in the C++ programming language. Related software was
used as guidance for CAMDLES development. All described software is open source and
is distributed under the terms of the GNU Public License.
Figure 1. Software technology tree. CAMDLES relates to parent software via black arrows and related
software via green arrows.

Life 2022, 12, 660
4 of 21
Table 1. Parent and related software. Parent software includes CAMDLES dependencies or packages
derived from dependencies and related software includes packages that indirectly inspire CAMDLES
development.
Name
Publication Year
Description and Relevant Features
References
Parent Software
LAMMPS
(Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular
Massively Parallel Simulator)
1995
Classical molecular dynamics simulator
•
Brownian motion
•
Gravity
[34]
LIGGGHTS® (LAMMPS Improved for
General Granular and Granular Heat
Transfer Simulations)
2012
Enhanced support for larger granular
particles
•
Heat and mass transfer
[33]
OpenFOAM (Field Operation and
Manipulation)
1998
Computational ﬂuid dynamics package
•
Single reference frame
•
Heat convection buoyant
Boussinesq approximation
[35]
CFDEM®Coupling
2012
Couples LIGGGHTS® and OpenFOAM
•
Scalar transport
•
Robust coupling models [36]
[32]
Related Software
SediFOAM
2017
Alternative solid–ﬂuid coupling
approach of LAMMPS and OpenFOAM
[37]
NUFEB (Newcastle University Frontiers
in Engineering Biology)
2019
Agent-based biological extension of
SediFOAM
•
Energy-based and diffusion-based
Monod Kinetics
•
Biological growth
[31]
ParScale (Particle Scale Models)
2017
Intra-particle transport models coupled
to LIGGGHTS® and CFDEM®Coupling
•
Single chemical reaction
[38]
COMETS (Computation of Microbial
Ecosystems in Time and Space)
2021
Population-based ﬂux balance analysis
with spatial growth and diffusion
•
Evolution
•
Multiple species/genotypes
[39]
2.2. An Engineered Cross-Feeding Microbial Community
We simulated a previously described (Figure 2) engineered model microbial commu-
nity involving two bacterial strains, Escherichia coli K12 ∆metB and Salmonella enterica ser. Ty-
phimurium, that were extensively studied in 1 g but not in space conditions [20,28–30,40–43].
The E. coli strain is auxotrophic for the amino acid methionine and secretes acetate as a
secondary metabolic product. The S. enterica depends on the secreted acetate for growth,
and the strain was experimentally evolved to secrete methionine to support the E. coli. The
coculture is therefore dependent upon cross-feeding when grown in a minimal medium
containing lactose as the sole carbon source for growth.

Life 2022, 12, 660
5 of 21
Figure 2. Model microbial community simulated in this study. Adapted with permission from [28];
published by Cell Reports, 2014. When grown in minimal media with lactose, Escherichia coli K12
with a metB gene knockout (E. coli ∆metB) provides acetate as the carbon growth substrate necessary
for a methionine-secreting mutant of Salmonella enterica ser. Typhimurium (S. enterica) to grow. In
exchange, the S. enterica provides the methionine necessary for the E. coli to grow.
Because of the organisms’ dependence on the ﬂux of exchanged metabolites, the
population dynamics of this model microbial community were found to depend on the
spatial structure of the community [20]. For instance, colonies growing on agar medium
achieve smaller sizes when located further away from each other, and a third colony
blocking the exchange of metabolites between an E. coli colony and an S. enterica colony
can cause a complex “metabolic eclipse” effect [28].
We hypothesized that in cross-feeding cocultures, reduced mixing in a quiescent
microgravity ﬂuid environment will enable high growth rates when the two species are
colocalized in cooperative colonies, but only low growth rates when the species are located
distantly from one another. We further hypothesized that in an RWV that simulates
microgravity imperfectly, a variety of mechanical and ﬂuid interactions will reduce the
impact of colony localization on the growth rate.
2.3. Simulation Domain
In our simulations, we designed cooperative colonies with varying degrees of popu-
lation density and localization. Limits in computing power necessarily made simulation
timespans much shorter than the generation time of the species; we, therefore, considered
the growth rate in terms of the cell mass increase rather than replication, in addition to
metabolite production and consumption rates, to assess whether relative growth rates and
mass transfer rates were sustainable in our prescribed cocultures. Additionally, CAMDLES
does not support changes in diffusion based on solutes or solids, such as an extracellular
matrix (ECM); therefore, to simulate the effect of such features, we were constrained to
choosing a constant diffusion rate for each solute. We compared three diffusion rates: low
diffusion seen in solid bioﬁlms/ECM, intermediate diffusion, and high diffusion seen in
liquid media (Table S1). When the distinction is not stated, we set all solute diffusivities to
an intermediate 5 × 10−6 cm2/s.
We chose our computational domain to be a box that was 300 µm × 100 µm × 300 µm
in size, which is the smallest box that can host two cells at an inoculation cell density of
105 cells/mL per species. A ﬂuid parcel was 5 µm × 20 µm × 5 µm with a volume equal
to that of ~430 bacterial cells when randomly packed. For some case studies, we varied
the cell densities between 105 and 108 cells/mL, exploring a range of microbial population
densities commonly achieved with this system in laboratory culture. During simulation
initialization, cells were placed in colony-like formations: either a dense spherical mass
of cells, or a mass with Gaussian random distributions around a sphere. We also tested
random cell placements distributed throughout the computational domain, as well as a

Life 2022, 12, 660
6 of 21
cylindrical colony formation as an approximation of a bioﬁlm shape in the case of 1 g
gravity. Periodic boundary conditions were set for the non-radial boundaries. In the radial
direction, the outer wall was set as an inlet with zero velocity, and the inner wall was a
freestream outlet. Cell metabolism was kickstarted by giving each species cell equivalents
of product for the other species, i.e., E. coli was given acetate, and S. enterica was given
methionine. This is similar to previous studies with this system using modeling with
ordinary differential equations and is necessary to enable growth at initial timepoints [29].
In simulations with higher initial cell populations, we gave less starting product, ranging
from 10−2 cell equivalents during inoculation, to 10−8 at maximum population. After
initialization, each case study ran for two to ﬁve minutes, assuming cell growth to be
exponential during this time.
2.4. Mechanical Models
We assumed the volume and density of a bacterial cell to be the same for both species,
namely, E. coli and S. enterica. The volume was calculated as if the cell was a spherocylinder,
but was converted to an equivalent Stokes radius (1) and approximated as a sphere in silico.
r =
3Vcell
4π
 1
3
(1)
The Stokes drag for a very low Reynolds number was applied to each bacterial cell
(2).
⇀
vs and
⇀
u f are the solid and ﬂuid velocities, respectively. In this study, u f in (2) was
assumed to be negligible. Because of the low inertia, the solid–ﬂuid momentum coupling
caused by the Stokes drag was also assumed to be negligible.
Fviscous = 6πrµ

vs −u f

(2)
In the case of artiﬁcial microgravity, the simulation box was placed in a rotating
reference frame that matched the rotation rate of the RWV (see Figure 3). Solid-body ﬂuid
rotation was enforced at the beginning of the artiﬁcial microgravity simulation. The net
body frame acceleration
⇀a
B was derived (3) using centrifugal, Coriolis, gravity, and drag
accelerations for the cells in the rotating frame. Archimedean buoyancy was also accounted
for in the centrifugal and gravity terms by use of speciﬁc gravity. The last term is the
viscous drag, with
ρ f
ρs being the ﬂuid–solid density ratio and ν being the kinematic liquid
viscosity.
⇀a
B = −
⇀ω ×

⇀ω ×
⇀
rB

1 −
ρ f
ρs

−2

⇀ω ×
⇀
vB

+
⇀g

1 −
ρ f
ρs

−9
2
ρ f
ρs
ν
⇀
vs −
⇀
u f
 1
r2
(3)
Figure 3. Free body diagram of a particle immersed in an RWV. Acceleration terms are described in
Equation (3). The simulation domain is a rectangular box in a rotating reference frame.

Life 2022, 12, 660
7 of 21
Because
⇀
rB spans the range of only ±1.5%,
⇀
rB was set to a constant extending to the
center of the simulation box. The centrifugal acceleration term was approximated as a
uniform body force
⇀ac. In this study, we set the radius of rotation to be 1 cm, positioning the
computational domain within an imagined culture vessel with a rotation rate of 10 R.P.M.
(common for bacteria in artiﬁcial microgravity experiments).
The rotating reference frame acceleration was also applied to the ﬂuid as a modiﬁcation
of the left-hand side of the incompressible Navier–Stokes Equation (4). The Boussinesq
approximation for natural, solutal, and convective ﬂows was applied to the right-hand side
of the equation; this assumed that solutal changes in ﬂuid density were small enough to
affect buoyancy force only and neither the inertia nor viscosity [40]. For this study, this
approximation was included three times, once for each metabolite in the media: acetate,
methionine, and lactose. ε is the local ﬂuid volume fraction.
∂ε
⇀
u f
∂t
+

ε
⇀
u f · ∇
 ⇀
u f + ε

⇀ω ×

⇀ω ×
⇀
rB

+ 2

⇀ω ×
⇀
vB

=−ε∇
prgh
ρ
+ ν∇·

∇ε
⇀
u f

+ ε
⇀g +
⇀ac

[βSi(Si −SiR) + . . .]
(4)
Here, prgh is the modiﬁed pressure prgh = p −ρ f

⇀g ·
⇀
h

, with
⇀
h as the height of the
ﬂuid. The scalar βSi linearly interpolates the difference in the ith solute concentration—
compared to a reference concentration SiR—to a difference in ﬂuid density.
The cells were assumed to be non-motile strains for simplicity. Non-motile strains
show an increased response to microgravity effects compared to motile strains, which may
be due to their inability to migrate in their ﬂuid environment [17,19,44]. Moreover, for
simplicity, Brownian motion was not incorporated because the phenomenon is independent
of the microgravity environment and can be approximated as negligible in solid bioﬁlms
and adherent cultures [45]; however, Brownian motion can be incorporated in future
implementations of the model since it is a built-in LAMMPS feature. Brownian motion-
based diffusion is about one thousand times smaller than solute diffusion [46] and was
accounted for long-term in the creation of initial cell Gaussian distributions at the start of
the simulations.
2.5. Chemical Models
We assumed the chemical concentrations within the cell to be uniform at the chemical
timestep, making the following Equation (6) suitable for mass transport into the cell. The
rate of substrate intake is dependent on the cell surface area AC, the mass transfer coefﬁcient
hS, and the substrate concentration difference from the ﬂuid parcel outside of the cell to the
inside of the cell.
dSC
dt = AChS (S −SC)
(5)
The mass transfer coefﬁcient hS is related to the local ﬂuid parcel Sherwood number
(6). A Sherwood number correlation for CFD-DEM ﬂows that were empirically determined
was provided by Deen et al. [47].
hS
DM/2r = Sh =

7 −10ε + 5ε2
1 + 0.17Re
1
5
P Sc
1
3

+

1.33 −2.31ε + 1.16ε2
Re
7
10
P Sc
1
3 ;
0 ≤ReP ≤100
(6)
ε is the ﬂuid parcel volume fraction, Sc is the Schmidt number, and the particle
Reynolds number ReP is between 0 and 100.
We assumed that the growth was directly dependent on one substrate only. For
E. coli, the rate-limiting substrate was methionine, and for S. enterica, acetate. Because
we assumed their growth was rate-limited as a phenomenon of mass transfer, and not
of internal cell metabolism, we assumed zero-order kinetics for each cell to convert the
substrate into a product once the substrate was transported into the cell [48]. Using biomass

Life 2022, 12, 660
8 of 21
yield ratios (Table S1), quantities of substrate were scaled to cell biomass equivalents and
then nondimensionalized using the standard cell mass. For S. enterica:
(1 cell equivalent) Acetate
yields
→(YMA cell equivalents) Methionine
k = µmax,S. enterica
(7)
compared to E. coli:
(1 cell equivalent) Methionine + (1 cell equivalent) Lactose
yields
→(YAM cell equivalents) Acetate
k = µmax,E.
(8)
2.6. Biological Models
We set up all simulations to occur during the exponential growth phase, and thus all
cells were actively growing during the simulation. The Monod kinetic model for single-
cell growth, where [S] is the media bulk substrate concentration, is commonly used in
agent-based and metabolic cell models [49].
µ = µmax
[S]
KS + [S]
(9)
CAMDLES uses an altered Monod kinetic model that directly ties Monod kinetics to
rate-limiting mass transfer [48]. Here (10),
h
Sf
i
and [SC] are the concentrations of the local
ﬂuid parcel surrounding the cell and within the cell, respectively. Thus, KS differs from
that seen in (9) and those seen in empirical growth data.
µ = µmax
h
Sf
i
−[SC]

KS +
h
Sf
i
−[SC]

(10)
In Equation (11), the Monod half-velocity constant KS is related to the heat transfer
coefﬁcient, the biomass density, the diameter of a spherical cell, the maximal growth rate,
the biomass–substrate yield ratio, and the mass transfer coefﬁcient.
KS = 1
hS
ρcdcµmax
6YXS
(11)
At the simulation timescale of a few minutes only, we expected no cell division to
occur. Thus, we refer to the growth rate as the individual cell increase in mass. Because
we focused on relative growth rates in comparing RWV and microgravity environments,
we assumed the metabolism to cause anabolic growth only, with no maintenance or decay
terms like those found in NUFEB. This assumption is valid for the mass transfer-based
Monod kinetic model (10) [50].
3. Results
Experiment inputs for all simulations described in this manuscript are given in Sup-
plementary Table S2 and input ﬁles are available at the Zenodo data repository (doi:
10.5281/zenodo.6369617). In all simulations, we found that E. coli and S. enterica growth
were directly coupled. As one grew, so did the other at a rate based on the ratio of
their cell yield ratios: YAM
YMA . To simplify the presentation, we depict only one species or
metabolite at a time in ﬁgures, choosing to represent the species with more growth. Mean
growth rates across a species are presented only when the simulation ran to steady-state
growth. We report relative growth rates as a percentage of the maximum growth rate:
µmax = 1.82 × 10−5 s−1 for E. coli and µmax = 9.09 × 10−6 s−1 for S. enterica.

Life 2022, 12, 660
9 of 21
3.1. Microgravity
For the ﬁrst set of CAMDLES simulations, we tested the hypothesis that co-localization
is necessary to enable high growth rates in the simplest environment: no gravity force.
We sought to characterize how, in this condition, the spatial arrangement of the microbial
community members inﬂuenced their ability to exchange metabolites and grow.
3.1.1. Colocalization or Starting Metabolites Could Initiate Growth after Inoculation
Laboratory experiments are often initiated with a low population density. We tested an
inoculation cell count of one cell per species in the simulation (equivalent to ~105 cells/mL
in a larger volume) and assessed the dependence of growth on spatial organization. In
a typical experiment inoculated at low density, we can expect some E. coli and S. enterica
cells to colocalize via random chance. We compared three levels of spatial organization
with the placement of two cells ranging from as close as possible (1 µm) to as far away
as possible (218 µm). We observed that at this cell count, the steady-state growth rate
depended on the spatial organization under normal conditions (µ = 1.2 × 10−6 s−1, 4.9% of
maximum growth rate when close together, compared to 0.8% when far apart). However,
we also tested the effect of starting cells with high intracellular levels of the opposite
species’ metabolite (0.01 cell equivalents of acetate or methionine, as compared to a nominal
0.00001 cell equivalents), and found that in this situation, the dependence of growth on
spatial organization was mostly lost; cells grew at µ = 2.9 × 10−6 s−1 when closest together
and at µ = 2.7 × 10−6 s−1 when farthest apart.
3.1.2. Early-Phase Growth Rates Increased with Time and Population Density
In the early, low-density growth phase (100–283 cells in the simulation, ~106 cells/mL),
we assumed that cells randomly divide and distribute throughout liquid media. Thus, we
set diffusion rates in the early growth phase to be that of the liquid culture. We tested a
counterexample with both 100-cell and 283-cell spherical-Gaussian-packed colonies and
found their steady growth rate to be hindered by ~10% compared to a randomly distributed
simulation placement (Table S2), likely due to spatial interference for diffusion or Monod
competition for metabolites. In contrast, at higher population counts (2000 cells in the
simulation, ~108 cells/mL), the exchange of metabolites was most rapid in a compact
clump of cells (Figure 4). Overall, we found that for the conﬁguration with random spatial
distributions, larger populations reached higher growth rates but with diminishing returns
as populations approach densities on the order of ~107 cells/mL, and never reached the
growth rates achieved by densely packed cells (Figure 4).
At low cell counts, growth did not reach a steady-state rate, and it may likely never be
reached within simulation timescales. Thus, we interpreted non-steady growth as a marker
for a growth regime: the only way for average culture growth rates to increase in the early
phase is for cells to divide and spread out.
3.1.3. Growth Rate Was Limited by Diffusion Rate with Increasing Colony Size
In a cross-feeding community, the growth rate is non-linearly dependent on the total
number and density of cells: as described above, there are some regimes in which more
cells lead to faster growth, but in colonies of many densely packed cells, the biomass and
extracellular matrix (ECM) may limit the diffusion rate of metabolites. In an experiment,
colonies may densely or loosely pack depending on the gravity platform: microgravity
alone may result in the formation of loose cell aggregates or colonies suspended in a liquid
medium simply because there is insufﬁcient mixing to separate the cells as they replicate.
To investigate these different colony-like scenarios, we compared growth rates in two
different diffusion situations: solid bioﬁlms and loose liquid aggregates. We kept all other
product yield and cell ratio parameters at baseline (1.86 E. coli:1 S. enterica). We sought
to ﬁnd the population size at which a microbial community growth rate was optimal
by measuring growth rates in colonies with different numbers of cells using diffusion

Life 2022, 12, 660
10 of 21
parameters seen in liquid culture compared to those seen in a solid bioﬁlm with an ECM
(Table S1).
 
Figure 4. Average E. coli Fold Change in Mass vs. Colony Population in Microgravity. Solid lines
represent statistical means, while transparent wedges represent inner quartiles. Either densely packed
spherical or randomly distributed colonies were generated at various sizes. Only one colony was
generated per simulation. Note: as the population density increased, the standard deviation of
growth rates increased, which was likely caused by local spatial heterogeneity within the simulation
domain, increasing the likelihood of resource competition.
We found that if the multispecies community formed an ECM (solid colony case),
the growth rate was limited by diffusion as colonies increased in size: it increased with
increasing colony size up to about 500 cells and then plateaued (Figure 5). Thus, we can
expect that if colonies form solid aggregates, we will see them most commonly at this size in
microgravity and RWVs. However, if the multispecies community does not form an ECM
(liquid colony case), but rather is held together only by the quiescent ﬂuid environment
of microgravity, product yield ratios, rather than diffusion, become the limiting growth
factor (see Section 3.2.3 below). Thus, for small population sizes, the growth rate in low
diffusivity bioﬁlm-like colonies is higher than in high-diffusivity liquid colonies, but the
effect is reversed for large populations. In our simulations, the solid–liquid transition
occurred with a colony size of about 500 cells.
3.1.4. Spatial Dependence Maintained Species Ratios and High Populations
The spatial structure becomes more signiﬁcant with higher populations (~108 cells/mL)
and more challenging growth conditions. We made growth harder by increasing the
E. coli:S. enterica population ratio, achieving a methionine deﬁciency and thus having the
overall effect of amplifying the dependence on the spatial structure. We visualized the
concentration ﬁeld for acetate after three minutes of simulation (Figure 6). The multispecies
colony exhibited growth, while the cells that were random-uniformly distributed grew at a
much lower rate.

Life 2022, 12, 660
11 of 21
 
Figure 5. E. coli Percent Maximum Growth Rate vs. Colony Population in Microgravity. Densely
packed multispecies spherical colonies were generated at various sizes. Only one colony was
generated per simulation. In solid colonies, self-insulation limited the growth rate beyond a colony
of 500 cells. The effect was reduced in liquid colonies.
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. Acetate diffusion. The symbol C represents the acetate concentration in units of cell
equivalents/µm3; note that the color scale is different between the two panels. Compared to other
simulations, the E. coli:S. enterica population ratio was increased to a 1956:44 count. Diffusion
parameters were set to be equal in (a,b) at a nominal 5 × 10−6 cm2/s. (a) Two-species spherical
colony; (b) random uniformly distributed cells.
3.2. Rotating Wall Vessel
3.2.1. Rotating Wall Vessel Increased the Metabolite Utilization Rate
To evaluate the effect of RWV-like rotation on metabolite exchange and cell growth
rates, we ran simulations using the same parameters as previously tested for microgravity
with 108 cells/mL (Section 3.1.2) but implemented gravity and a rotation rate of 10 R.P.M. at
a distance of 1 cm from the center of rotation. We found that when the cells were randomly

Life 2022, 12, 660
12 of 21
distributed, hydrodynamics only slightly affected RWV growth rates (29% of µmax) relative
to true microgravity (27% of µmax). The slight increase was caused by metabolite convective
transfer coefﬁcients increasing to 1.17 × 10−3 m/s from 1.06 × 10−3 m/s. However,
when the cells were clumped, complicated hydrodynamic effects modulated the growth
dynamics and resulted in very different growth between true microgravity and an RWV. We
tested a tightly packed colony in RWV conditions (Figure 7) and found that the direction
of the acetate gradient was reversed compared to microgravity. In microgravity, the
radial diffusion gradient from the colony was negative, which indicated that the colony
was producing excess metabolites. In comparison, the gradient from a colony in RWV
conditions was positive, which we interpreted to show that growth was not sustainable.
 
Figure 7. Acetate diffusion in RWV conditions. The color scale (symbol C) represents acetate
concentration in units of cell equivalents/µm3. Note that the direction of the diffusion gradient
was reversed in this case compared to that found in microgravity (Figure 6a) and that the acetate
concentrations decreased. The reversed gradient indicated that the growth rates were unsustainable.
3.2.2. Separated Colonies Grew Slowly in Both the RWV and Microgravity
For this obligately cross-feeding consortium, separated single-species colonies—which
may form from adherent cells—are unfavorable for growth compared to multispecies
colonies. Because the spatial distribution of the two species in this case was intermediate
compared to randomly distributed or densely packed cases, it could provide insight into the
dominating growth-limiting mechanism (diffusion vs. convection vs. production), while
controlling for population density. We tested the interaction between two single-species
colonies in a regime with our baseline intermediate level of diffusion (Table S1) and like the
randomly distributed case (Section 3.1.4), found very little difference between community
growth rates in microgravity and RWV (Figure 8). This is unlike other cases, such as a
single multispecies colony and a 1 g gravity bioﬁlm (Figure 8b). In the separate-species case,

Life 2022, 12, 660
13 of 21
the diffusion between colonies was the limiting factor; therefore, the complex dynamics of
rotation did not inﬂuence the cross-feeding community growth rates.
In an RWV, the growth rates decreased with time (Figure 8b); in this condition there
was higher substrate utilization at initialization, but overall, lower growth rates in a steady
state.
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8. Single-species Colonies Distanced Far apart. The E. coli:S. enterica population ratio was
adjusted to optimal conditions (1895 count:105 count). (a) Coculture colonies of E. coli (green) and
S. enterica (red). The symbol C represents acetate concentration in units of cell equivalents/µm3.
Colonies were generated as spherical Gaussian distributions placed as far away as possible within
the computational domain. The microgravity case is displayed, but the RWV case was near-identical.
(b) Collection of S. enterica growth over time in tightly packed colonies. The centerline plots the
average cell mass. The dark shaded region shows the inner quartiles, and the light shaded region
shows the outer quartiles. The growth trajectories for the cases depicted in Figures 6a and 7 are
graphed here.

Life 2022, 12, 660
14 of 21
3.2.3. Product Yield Affected Growth Differently in RWV versus Microgravity
During a late-stage culture, multispecies colonies allow for the most rapid growth. We
returned to simulating a multispecies colony and controlled for the population to measure
the growth rate modulation by the balance of diffusion, convection, and production. We
probed this relationship by testing the effect of the RWV hydrodynamic environment in
simulations with various product yield rates λS (S. enterica) and λE (E. coli). The product
yield parameter λx expresses the amount, in cell equivalents, of resource x produced during
the growth of the producing species, and the ratio between λS and λE inﬂuences both the
species ratio and the growth rate of the consortium [29]. We found that the advantage
of an RWV over microgravity in terms of growth rate decreased as the product yields
increased (Figure 9). However, when using baseline λS and λE values, the overall effect of
the RWV hydrodynamic environment was unclear, as it depended on diffusion parameters.
We tested two sets of diffusion parameters—those found in bioﬁlms/ECM (Figure 9a)
and those found in liquid media (Figure 9b)—and found that the RWV overall increased
the growth rates when we assumed low diffusion but decreased growth rates when we
assumed high diffusion.
(a) Low Diffusion 
 
(b) High Diffusion 
Figure 9. E. coli Percent Maximum Growth Rate with Various Product Yield Parameters λ. If not
speciﬁed, λ was set to 100% as the default. Densely packed multispecies spherical colonies were
generated with a colony size of 2000 cells. Only one colony was generated per simulation. In an RWV,
gravity caused the colonies to move as either a rigid unit (regarded as a solid) or each cell moved
individually (regarded as liquid). This was not important to the growth rates and was only tested
in: (a) an RWV vs. microgravity with low diffusion parameters like those in bioﬁlms. * S. Enterica
growth is displayed as it was the faster-growing species, and the diffusion was at an intermediate
level. (b) An RWV vs. microgravity with high diffusion parameters like those in liquid media.

Life 2022, 12, 660
15 of 21
3.3. In 1 g Gravity
3.3.1. Gravity Induced the Spatial Structure
The reduced sedimentation exhibited by RWV and microgravity may itself change the
spatial structure of colonies. To compare the 1 g gravity effect of sedimentation, we placed
either a 2D circular bioﬁlm (growth trajectory depicted in Figure 8b) or a spherical bioﬁlm
(Figure 10) on the bottom ﬂoor of the simulation box. We found that the two conformations
had different growth rates, indicating that reduced growth in 1 g gravity could be caused
by the geometry of the colony or by its localization on the ﬂoor. When cells sediment to the
ﬂoor, diffusion was restricted upward, where the overall impact depended on the colony
geometry.
 
Figure 10. Natural Convective Flow. A spherical bioﬁlm placed on the simulation ﬂoor exhibited
solute convective ﬂows in a 1 g gravity condition. Red velocity arrows, in units of s−1, are scaled
up by 1000×. The concentration ﬁeld of acetate is depicted from high to low as red to blue. Fluid
simulation boundaries are periodic except on the ﬂoor and ceiling of the box.
3.3.2. Natural Convective Flow Was Negligible
Our simulations also showed that in 1 g, natural convection in a bioﬁlm could result
in up to a 20% increased growth rate relative to microgravity. Yet, when the diffusivity was
increased to that of liquid media, the growth rate only increased by 3% as the metabolite
convective plume diffused. However, it is worth acknowledging that the effect of convec-
tion in 1 g (and thus RWV) in our simulation conditions was negligible when compared to
particle Brownian convection (Brownian diffusivity ~10−9). When multiplied by a max-
imum simulation Péclet number of ~0.05, the realistic convective effect was ~0.1–1%. A
natural convective ﬂow is displayed (Figure 10) in 1 g gravity.

Life 2022, 12, 660
16 of 21
4. Discussion
In this study, we used CFD-DEM modeling to investigate the relationship between
the physical environment and the ecological interactions in a microbial community. We
chose to simulate a community for which similar research questions were addressed using
a very different form of modeling, namely, dynamic ﬂux balance analysis and metabolite
diffusion on a lattice, using the COMETS platform [28]. Several contrasts are worth noting.
CAMDLES assumes that the internal metabolism time is negligible compared to the time
for metabolites to transfer throughout liquid media, and thus we effectively linearized
the Monod kinetics equation. Importantly, this approximation is more accurate the lower
the diffusivity of metabolites. When simulating low diffusivity, we observed growth
rates around 10–20% of µmax, but with high diffusivity, we observed up to 35% of µmax.
Accordingly, the general growth results of this study agreed with the ~35% relative growth
rate seen in vitro in 1 g gravity [30].
Diffusivity affects the extent to which community growth is dependent on the spatial
distribution of cells. Unfortunately, in CAMDLES, we could not model the effects of
non-cellular solids, such as an extracellular matrix (ECM), on diffusivity. In vitro and in
silico effective diffusivities decrease in solid bioﬁlms [51,52], limiting mass transfer overall.
Baseline diffusivities for each metabolite were set as constant in CAMDLES; we were able to
change these values to explore differences between bioﬁlm-like and non-bioﬁlm situations,
but such changes were global and, therefore, unable to reﬂect far-ﬁeld effects outside of
colonies within a larger liquid culture vessel. Moreover, the metabolic state of the cells
within the bioﬁlm was not resolved, as we assumed all cells to be actively growing.
The speciﬁc goal of this work was to compare the conditions of artiﬁcial microgravity
and spaceﬂight microgravity and assess which factors led to the most similar results
between the two conditions. When solid bioﬁlms form in RWVs, bigger spherical aggregates
and more growth are favored relative to those in microgravity. In addition, the ECM effect
on diffusion may also increase growth rates compared to those in microgravity. However, if
colonies are loose, liquid aggregates, RWVs may reduce the spatial structure of non-motile
cells. In summary, RWVs generally amplify the spatial importance of this multispecies
microbial community, leading to different aggregation sizes and population ratios. This
may change, however, depending on the product yield rates and population proportions of
the species.
A speciﬁc insight that CAMDLES provides is its ability to predict when optimal
community growth conditions vary between RWV and microgravity. We found that in
the low-population stage of metabolite exchange, planktonic growth was favorable. In
our simulations, low-population growth rates increased over time. Later, as cross-feeding
metabolites accumulated, planktonic growth rates approached a maximum level. Higher
growth rates then only occurred when cells aggregated into either a densely packed bioﬁlm
or a loose spherical aggregate. These results parallel observations showing that bacteria
can exhibit a planktonic/bioﬁlm transition at a critical point [52], and hint that future
CAMDLES studies could offer insight into growth strategies underlying multispecies
bioﬁlm formation. In 1 g and RWV cases, forces will likely break apart spherical aggregates
and, thus, we would expect to observe mostly spherical, solid-bioﬁlm formation, but
organisms might evolve different strategies in microgravity.
More work is necessary to determine whether our simulation domain size was large
enough to capture the diffusion dynamics of metabolites; although it is large enough to
contain a single colony, it did not consider all possible interactions with multiple colonies,
except for the simplest, uniform interaction from choosing periodic boundary conditions.
Additionally, since we had to prescribe the population size, aggregation, and colocalization
of species during the start of the simulation, we were only able to compare relative growth
rates in speciﬁc conditions. While this gave us the advantage of ﬁne-tuning the experiments
to compare diverse culture conditions, it limited the conclusions we could make about
long-term growth dynamics. Because of the difference in biological and hydrodynamic
timescales, CAMDLES simulations did not run long enough to encounter cell division.

Life 2022, 12, 660
17 of 21
However, the timespan was large enough that, except for low population levels, steady-state
growth (cell mass accumulation) rates were achieved.
At the evolutionary scale, one predictor of the potential size of bioﬁlms or cell ag-
gregates could be the point at which the optimal spatial arrangement transitions from
planktonic to aggregated according to different diffusivities. At a certain point, an ECM
reduces diffusion and limits growth rates, and thus the colony size, of solid-spherical
bioﬁlms. In CAMDLES, this occurs at a colony size of around 500–1000 cells. Thus, we
expect that if colonies form solid aggregates, we will see them most commonly at this size
in microgravity and RWVs.
We underscore that these results hold only for multi-species aggregates and not
for single-species aggregates. In contrast to agar plates, where single-species colonies
can support each other at a distance, multi-species colonies are necessary for metabolite
exchange in liquid media in all three conditions tested (RWV, microgravity, 1 g). One
potential explanation concerned two disadvantages: single-species colonies exhibit both
the poor diffusive transport that cells in a planktonic culture experience and the intra-colony
competition for metabolites that cells in dense communities experience. Yet, CAMDLES
simulations do not resolve the long-term spatiotemporal effects of an RWV and 1 g for these
scenarios. The long-term effect is simplest in a quiescent environment of microgravity, but
interactions between multiple colonies would be more complicated in an RWV sedimenting
environment.
Overall, we observed that the differences between microgravity and artiﬁcial micro-
gravity originated primarily from increased mass transfer caused by RWV convective ﬂows
and sedimentation. Even though convection ﬂuid currents may be negligible in 1 g and
RWVs, the increased mass transfer coefﬁcient of cells hS resulted in a 9% reduction in the
Monod half-saturation constant KS. The spatiotemporal dynamics and substrate utilization
of the colony itself were changed by the KS change in both species. However, these mass
transfer coefﬁcient increases were minor in comparison to those that would result from
Brownian motion if it were implemented, which is signiﬁcantly more rapid than RWV sedi-
mentation [53]. On the other hand, it is limited in the case of solid bioﬁlms [45]; therefore,
we can assert that solid bioﬁlms are more accurately simulated in CAMDLES. Generally,
if Brownian motion and cell motility were included in the simulation, we would likely
observe a reduction in the relative difference between microgravity and RWV growth rates,
and an overall reduction in growth rates due to long-term biomass dispersion throughout
the simulation domain.
5. Conclusions
CAMDLES is designed to be easily modiﬁable and extendable. It retains the modular-
ity and support that is featured in the open-source software LAMMPS and OpenFOAM.
Further functionality with CAMDLES includes exploring the effect of motility, Brownian
motion, cell–cell adhesion, or multisphere support for rod-shaped bacteria on microbial
cell dynamics. These general features are already included in LIGGGHTS®/LAMMPS.
Additionally, CAMDLES retains the functionality of ParScale, which can model transport
and chemical reactions within a spherical particle. This multiscale simulation functionality
provides new avenues for microbial agent-based modeling in RWVs.
The greatest limitations of CAMDLES stem from size and timespan constraints. The
simultaneous ﬂuid, particle, and chemical models incorporated in CAMDLES limit the
timescale of simulation to only a few minutes on a personal computer. Performance has
yet to be analyzed on high-performance computing clusters. However, CAMDLES retains
the highly efﬁcient parallelization found in LIGGGHTS® and CFDEM®Coupling. Added
features, such as Brownian motion, bacterial motility, and more complex metabolic cell
models, would also add computational overhead. In the future, computational cost can be
relieved by developing coarse-grained models for CAMDLES. In conjunction with agent-
based models, employing a computationally efﬁcient, coarse-grained modeling approach

Life 2022, 12, 660
18 of 21
can provide detailed conclusions regarding the multigenerational evolution and population
dynamics of microbial communities.
Based on our simulations, we found artiﬁcial microgravity to have an amplifying effect
on mass transfer and metabolite uptake compared to microgravity and a diminishing effect
on sedimentation compared to 1 g gravity. Although not tested in this study, the size and
rotation rate of the RWV balance these two factors, and in future work, CAMDLES could
be used to explore these experimental variables. Ultimately, the RWV effect on population
growth rate is unclear and speciﬁc to the microbial community of study. Thus, our package
has the potential to serve as a basis to demystify the inconsistencies seen in microbial
communities between RWVs and microgravity. This ﬁrst implementation of CAMDLES
serves to demonstrate the importance of a microbial cell’s immediate physical environment
on population- and community-level behaviors, especially in the space environment, and
in experiments meant to simulate the space environment. CAMDLES represents the type of
computational tool capable of providing biologists with unprecedented insight into those
interacting physical, chemical, and biological processes.
Supplementary Materials:
The following supporting information can be downloaded at
https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/life12050660/s1, Table S1: Physical, Chemical, and Biologi-
cal Parameters [54–63]. Table S2: Simulation Details and Results. File S1: CAMDLES software ﬁles.
Author Contributions: R.A.: investigation, methodology, software, data curation, formal analysis,
visualization, and writing—original draft. J.A.L.: conceptualization, project administration, resources,
supervision, and writing—review and editing. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: Funding for this study was provided by the Space Biology program of NASA’s Biological
and Physical Sciences (BPS) Division through the Space Life Sciences Training Program (SLSTP).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available within the article and
Supplementary Material, and/or can be reproduced using the code in File S1 and experiment input
ﬁles available at the Zenodo data repository (doi:10.5281/zenodo.6369617).
Acknowledgments: We thank Will Harcombe and Jeremy Chacón (University of Minnesota) for
providing growth and yield parameters for the microbial species and general guidance in understand-
ing their biology. We thank Daniel Borrero-Echeverry (Williamette University), Darrell Jan (NASA
Ames Research Center), and Luis Zea (University of Colorado, Boulder) for useful discussions. We
also thank V. Katie Blackwell (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Amrita Singh (University
of Southern California), and Matthew Paddock (NASA Ames Research Center) for comments on
the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Singh, N.K.; Wood, J.M.; Karouia, F.; Venkateswaran, K. Succession and Persistence of Microbial Communities and Antimicrobial
Resistance Genes Associated with International Space Station Environmental Surfaces. Microbiome 2018, 6, 204. [CrossRef]
2.
Häder, D.-P.; Braun, M.; Hemmersbach, R. Bioregenerative Life Support Systems in Space Research. In Gravitational Biology I:
Gravity Sensing and Graviorientation in Microorganisms and Plants; Braun, M., Böhmer, M., Häder, D.-P., Hemmersbach, R., Palme,
K., Eds.; SpringerBriefs in Space Life Sciences; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 113–122, ISBN
978-3-319-93894-3.
3.
McNulty, M.J.; Berliner, A.J.; Negulescu, P.G.; McKee, L.; Hart, O.; Yates, K.; Arkin, A.P.; Nandi, S.; McDonald, K.A. Evaluating
the Cost of Pharmaceutical Puriﬁcation for a Long-Duration Space Exploration Medical Foundry. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 12,
700863. [CrossRef]
4.
Zea, L.; McLean, R.J.C.; Rook, T.A.; Angle, G.; Carter, D.L.; Delegard, A.; Denvir, A.; Gerlach, R.; Gorti, S.; McIlwaine, D.; et al.
Potential Bioﬁlm Control Strategies for Extended Spaceﬂight Missions. Bioﬁlm 2020, 2, 100026. [CrossRef]

Life 2022, 12, 660
19 of 21
5.
Mora, M.; Wink, L.; Kögler, I.; Mahnert, A.; Rettberg, P.; Schwendner, P.; Demets, R.; Cockell, C.; Alekhova, T.; Klingl, A.; et al.
Space Station Conditions Are Selective but Do Not Alter Microbial Characteristics Relevant to Human Health. Nat. Commun.
2019, 10, 3990. [CrossRef]
6.
Podolich, O.; Kukharenko, O.; Haidak, A.; Zaets, I.; Zaika, L.; Storozhuk, O.; Palchikovska, L.; Orlovska, I.; Reva, O.; Borisova, T.;
et al. Multimicrobial Kombucha Culture Tolerates Mars-like Conditions Simulated on Low Earth Orbit. Astrobiology 2019, 19,
183–196. [CrossRef]
7.
Afshinnekoo, E.; Scott, R.T.; MacKay, M.J.; Pariset, E.; Cekanaviciute, E.; Barker, R.; Gilroy, S.; Hassane, D.; Smith, S.M.; Zwart,
S.R.; et al. Fundamental Biological Features of Spaceﬂight: Advancing the Field to Enable Deep-Space Exploration. Cell 2020, 183,
1162–1184. [CrossRef]
8.
Hammond, T.G.; Hammond, J.M. Optimized Suspension Culture: The Rotating-Wall Vessel. Am. J. Physiol.-Ren. Physiol. 2001,
281, F12–F25. [CrossRef]
9.
Klaus, D.M. Clinostats and Bioreactors. Gravit. Space Res. 2001, 14, 55–64.
10.
Santomartino, R.; Waajen, A.C.; de Wit, W.; Nicholson, N.; Parmitano, L.; Loudon, C.-M.; Moeller, R.; Rettberg, P.; Fuchs, F.M.; Van
Houdt, R.; et al. No Effect of Microgravity and Simulated Mars Gravity on Final Bacterial Cell Concentrations on the International
Space Station: Applications to Space Bioproduction. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 579156. [CrossRef]
11.
Nauman, E.A.; Ott, C.M.; Sander, E.; Tucker, D.L.; Pierson, D.; Wilson, J.W.; Nickerson, C.A. Novel Quantitative Biosystem for
Modeling Physiological Fluid Shear Stress on Cells. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2007, 73, 699–705. [CrossRef]
12.
Horneck, G.; Klaus, D.M.; Mancinelli, R.L. Space Microbiology. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2010, 74, 121–156. [CrossRef]
13.
Zea, L.; Prasad, N.; Levy, S.E.; Stodieck, L.; Jones, A.; Shrestha, S.; Klaus, D. A Molecular Genetic Basis Explaining Altered
Bacterial Behavior in Space. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0164359. [CrossRef]
14.
Huang, B.; Li, D.-G.; Huang, Y.; Liu, C.-T. Effects of Spaceﬂight and Simulated Microgravity on Microbial Growth and Secondary
Metabolism. Mil. Med. Res. 2018, 5, 18. [CrossRef]
15.
Aunins, T.R.; Erickson, K.E.; Prasad, N.; Levy, S.E.; Jones, A.; Shrestha, S.; Mastracchio, R.; Stodieck, L.; Klaus, D.; Zea, L.; et al.
Spaceﬂight Modiﬁes Escherichia Coli Gene Expression in Response to Antibiotic Exposure and Reveals Role of Oxidative Stress
Response. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 310. [CrossRef]
16.
Morrison, M.D.; Nicholson, W.L. Comparisons of Transcriptome Proﬁles from Bacillus Subtilis Cells Grown in Space versus High
Aspect Ratio Vessel (HARV) Clinostats Reveal a Low Degree of Concordance. Astrobiology 2020, 20, 1498–1509. [CrossRef]
17.
Fajardo-Cavazos, P.; Nicholson, W.L. Mechanotransduction in Prokaryotes: A Possible Mechanism of Spaceﬂight Adaptation. Life
2021, 11, 33. [CrossRef]
18.
Herranz, R.; Anken, R.; Boonstra, J.; Braun, M.; Christianen, P.C.M.; de Geest, M.; Hauslage, J.; Hilbig, R.; Hill, R.J.A.; Lebert,
M.; et al. Ground-Based Facilities for Simulation of Microgravity: Organism-Speciﬁc Recommendations for Their Use, and
Recommended Terminology. Astrobiology 2013, 13, 1–17. [CrossRef]
19.
Morrison, M.D.; Nicholson, W.L. Meta-Analysis of Data from Spaceﬂight Transcriptome Experiments Does Not Support the Idea
of a Common Bacterial “Spaceﬂight Response. ” Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 14403. [CrossRef]
20.
Harcombe, W. Novel Cooperation Experimentally Evolved Between Species. Evolution 2010, 64, 2166–2172. [CrossRef]
21.
Ilgrande, C.; Defoirdt, T.; Vlaeminck, S.E.; Boon, N.; Clauwaert, P. Media Optimization, Strain Compatibility, and Low-Shear
Modeled Microgravity Exposure of Synthetic Microbial Communities for Urine Nitriﬁcation in Regenerative Life-Support
Systems. Astrobiology 2019, 19, 1353–1362. [CrossRef]
22.
Brungs, S.; Hauslage, J.; Hemmersbach, R. Validation of Random Positioning Versus Clinorotation Using a Macrophage Model
System. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 2019, 31, 223–230. [CrossRef]
23.
Varley, M.C.; Markaki, A.E.; Brooks, R.A. Effect of Rotation on Scaffold Motion and Cell Growth in Rotating Bioreactors. Tissue
Eng. Part A 2017, 23, 522–534. [CrossRef]
24.
Phelan, M.A.; Gianforcaro, A.L.; Gerstenhaber, J.A.; Lelkes, P.I. An Air Bubble-Isolating Rotating Wall Vessel Bioreactor for
Improved Spheroid/Organoid Formation. Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 2019, 25, 479–488. [CrossRef]
25.
Ju, Z.-H.; Liu, T.-Q.; Ma, X.-H.; Cui, Z.-F. Numerical Simulation of Microcarrier Motion in a Rotating Wall Vessel Bioreactor.
Biomed. Environ. Sci. 2006, 19, 163–168.
26.
Lynch, S.V.; Mukundakrishnan, K.; Benoit, M.R.; Ayyaswamy, P.S.; Matin, A. Escherichia Coli Bioﬁlms Formed under Low-Shear
Modeled Microgravity in a Ground-Based System. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 7701–7710. [CrossRef]
27.
Chao, T.-C.; Das, D.B. Numerical Simulation of Coupled Cell Motion and Nutrient Transport in NASA’s Rotating Bioreactor.
Chem. Eng. J. 2015, 259, 961–971. [CrossRef]
28.
Harcombe, W.R.; Riehl, W.J.; Dukovski, I.; Granger, B.R.; Betts, A.; Lang, A.H.; Bonilla, G.; Kar, A.; Leiby, N.; Mehta, P.; et al.
Metabolic Resource Allocation in Individual Microbes Determines Ecosystem Interactions and Spatial Dynamics. Cell Rep. 2014,
7, 1104–1115. [CrossRef]
29.
Hammarlund, S.P.; Chacón, J.M.; Harcombe, W.R. A Shared Limiting Resource Leads to Competitive Exclusion in a Cross-Feeding
System. Environ. Microbiol. 2019, 21, 759–771. [CrossRef]
30.
Hammarlund, S.P.; Gedeon, T.; Carlson, R.P.; Harcombe, W.R. Limitation by a Shared Mutualist Promotes Coexistence of Multiple
Competing Partners. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 619. [CrossRef]

Life 2022, 12, 660
20 of 21
31.
Li, B.; Taniguchi, D.; Gedara, J.P.; Gogulancea, V.; Gonzalez-Cabaleiro, R.; Chen, J.; McGough, A.S.; Oﬁteru, I.D.; Curtis, T.P.;
Zuliani, P. NUFEB: A Massively Parallel Simulator for Individual-Based Modelling of Microbial Communities. PLoS Comput. Biol.
2019, 15, e1007125. [CrossRef]
32.
Kloss, C.; Goniva, C.; Hager, A.; Amberger, S.; Pirker, S. Models, Algorithms and Validation for Opensource DEM and CFD–DEM.
Prog. Comput. Fluid Dyn. Int. J. 2012, 12, 140–152. Available online: https://www.cfdem.com/cfdemrcoupling-open-source-cfd-
dem-framework (accessed on 15 April 2022). [CrossRef]
33.
Goniva, C.; Kloss, C.; Deen, N.G.; Kuipers, J.A.M.; Pirker, S. Inﬂuence of Rolling Friction on Single Spout Fluidized Bed Simulation.
Particuology 2012, 10, 582–591. Available online: https://www.cfdem.com/liggghtsr-open-source-discrete-element-method-
particle-simulation-code (accessed on 15 April 2022). [CrossRef]
34.
Plimpton, S. Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. J. Comput. Phys. 1995, 117, 1–19. Available online:
https://www.lammps.org/ (accessed on 15 April 2022). [CrossRef]
35.
Weller, H.G.; Tabor, G.; Jasak, H.; Fureby, C. A Tensorial Approach to Computational Continuum Mechanics Using Object-
Oriented Techniques. Comput. Phys. 1998, 12, 620–631. Available online: https://openfoam.org/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
[CrossRef]
36.
Fantin, D. CFD-DEM Coupling for Systems of Fluid and Non-Spherical Particles. Master’s Thesis, Delft University of Technology,
Delft, The Netherlands, 9 November 2018.
37.
Sun, R.; Xiao, H. SediFoam: A General-Purpose, Open-Source CFD–DEM Solver for Particle-Laden Flow with Emphasis on
Sediment Transport. Comput. Geosci. 2016, 89, 207–219. Available online: https://github.com/xiaoh/sediFoam (accessed on 15
April 2022). [CrossRef]
38.
Singhal, A.; Cloete, S.; Radl, S.; Quinta-Ferreira, R.; Amini, S. Heat Transfer to a Gas from Densely Packed Beds of Monodisperse
Spherical Particles. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 314, 27–37. Available online: https://www.cfdem.com/parscale-intra-particle-transport-
phenomena-simulation-code (accessed on 15 April 2022). [CrossRef]
39.
Dukovski, I.; Baji´c, D.; Chacón, J.M.; Quintin, M.; Vila, J.C.C.; Sulheim, S.; Pacheco, A.R.; Bernstein, D.B.; Riehl, W.J.; Korolev, K.S.;
et al. A Metabolic Modeling Platform for the Computation of Microbial Ecosystems in Time and Space (COMETS). Nat. Protoc.
2021, 16, 5030–5082. Available online: https://www.runcomets.org/ (accessed on 15 April 2022). [CrossRef]
40.
Douglas, S.M.; Chubiz, L.M.; Harcombe, W.R.; Marx, C.J. Identiﬁcation of the Potentiating Mutations and Synergistic Epistasis
That Enabled the Evolution of Inter-Species Cooperation. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0174345. [CrossRef]
41.
Adamowicz, E.M.; Flynn, J.; Hunter, R.C.; Harcombe, W.R. Cross-Feeding Modulates Antibiotic Tolerance in Bacterial Communi-
ties. ISME J. 2018, 12, 2723–2735. [CrossRef]
42.
Harcombe, W.R.; Chacón, J.M.; Adamowicz, E.M.; Chubiz, L.M.; Marx, C.J. Evolution of Bidirectional Costly Mutualism from
Byproduct Consumption. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115, 12000–12004. [CrossRef]
43.
Fazzino, L.; Anisman, J.; Chacón, J.M.; Heineman, R.H.; Harcombe, W.R. Lytic Bacteriophage Have Diverse Indirect Effects in a
Synthetic Cross-Feeding Community. ISME J. 2020, 14, 123–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Purcell, E.M. Life at Low Reynolds Number. Am. J. Phys. 1977, 45, 3–11. [CrossRef]
45.
Acemel, R.D.; Govantes, F.; Cuetos, A. Computer Simulation Study of Early Bacterial Bioﬁlm Development. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8,
5340. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Tuson, H.H.; Auer, G.K.; Renner, L.D.; Hasebe, M.; Tropini, C.; Salick, M.; Crone, W.C.; Gopinathan, A.; Huang, K.C.; Weibel, D.B.
Measuring the Stiffness of Bacterial Cells from Growth Rates in Hydrogels of Tunable Elasticity. Mol. Microbiol. 2012, 84, 874–891.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Deen, N.G.; Peters, E.A.J.F.; Padding, J.T.; Kuipers, J.A.M. Review of Direct Numerical Simulation of Fluid–Particle Mass,
Momentum and Heat Transfer in Dense Gas–Solid Flows. Chem. Eng. Sci. 2014, 116, 710–724. [CrossRef]
48.
Merchuk, J.C.; Asenjo, J.A. The Monod Equation and Mass Transfer. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1995, 45, 91–94. [CrossRef]
49.
Monod, J. The Growth of Bacterial Cultures. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 1949, 3, 371–394. [CrossRef]
50.
Liu, Y. Overview of Some Theoretical Approaches for Derivation of the Monod Equation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2007, 73,
1241–1250. [CrossRef]
51.
Stewart, P.S. Diffusion in Bioﬁlms. J. Bacteriol. 2003, 185, 1485–1491. [CrossRef]
52.
Angeles-Martinez, L.; Hatzimanikatis, V. The Inﬂuence of the Crowding Assumptions in Bioﬁlm Simulations. PLoS Comput. Biol.
2021, 17, e1009158. [CrossRef]
53.
Klaus, D.; Simske, S.; Todd, P.; Stodieck, L. Investigation of Space Flight Effects on Escherichia Coli and a Proposed Model of
Underlying Physical Mechanisms. Microbiology 1997, 143, 449–455. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Poon, C. Factors Implicating the Validity and Interpretation of Mechanobiology Studies in Simulated Microgravity Environments.
Eng. Rep. 2020, 2, e12242. [CrossRef]
55.
Benoit, M.R.; Klaus, D.M. Microgravity, Bacteria, and the Inﬂuence of Motility. Adv. Space Res. 2007, 39, 1225–1232. [CrossRef]
56.
Westerwalbesloh, C.; Grünberger, A.; Stute, B.; Weber, S.; Wiechert, W.; Kohlheyer, D.; von Lieres, E. Modeling and CFD
Simulation of Nutrient Distribution in Picoliter Bioreactors for Bacterial Growth Studies on Single-Cell Level. Lab A Chip 2015, 15,
4177–4186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Density of Aqueous Solutions of Organic Substances as Sugars and Alcohols. Available online: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/density-aqueous-solution-organic-sugar-alcohol-concentration-d_1954.html (accessed on 26 February 2022).

Life 2022, 12, 660
21 of 21
58.
Kumar, A.; Rani, R.; Saini, B.; Bamezai, R.K. Volumetric, Compressibility, Taste Behavior and Viscometric Studies of Methionine
with Some Saccharides in Aqueous Medium at Different Temperatures. J. Solution. Chem. 2017, 46, 931–956. [CrossRef]
59.
Darros-Barbosa, R.; Balaban, M.O.; Teixeira, A.A. Temperature and Concentration Dependence of Density of Model Liquid Foods.
Int. J. Food Prop. 2003, 6, 195–214. [CrossRef]
60.
Zea, L.; Larsen, M.; Estante, F.; Qvortrup, K.; Moeller, R.; Dias de Oliveira, S.; Stodieck, L.; Klaus, D. Phenotypic Changes
Exhibited by E. Coli Cultured in Space. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1598. [CrossRef]
61.
Sargo, C.R.; Campani, G.; Silva, G.G.; Giordano, R.C.; Da Silva, A.J.; Zangirolami, T.C.; Correia, D.M.; Ferreira, E.C.; Rocha, I.
Salmonella Typhimurium and Escherichia Coli Dissimilarity: Closely Related Bacteria with Distinct Metabolic Proﬁles. Biotechnol.
Prog. 2015, 31, 1217–1225. [CrossRef]
62.
Phillips, R.; Orme, N. Physical Biology of the Cell; Garland Science, Taylor and Francis Group LLC: New York, NY, USA, 2013.
63.
Díaz, I.B.Z.; Froelich, C.A.; Ricke, S.C. Adaptation of a Methionine Auxotroph Escherichia Coli Growth Assay to Microtiter Plates
for Quantitating Methionine. J. Rapid Methods Autom. Microbiol. 2002, 10, 217–229. [CrossRef]
