Perspective
Challenges and considerations for single-cell and
spatially resolved transcriptomics sample
collection during spaceﬂight
Eliah G. Overbey,1,2,18 Saswati Das,3,18 Henry Cope,4 Pedro Madrigal,5 Zaneta Andrusivova,6 Sole` ne Frapard,6
Rebecca Klotz,7 Daniela Bezdan,8,9,10 Anjali Gupta,11 Ryan T. Scott,7 Jiwoon Park,1 Dawn Chirko,1
Jonathan M. Galazka,12 Sylvain V. Costes,12 Christopher E. Mason,1,2,13,14 Raul Herranz,15 Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,4,16
Joseph Borg,17 and Stefania Giacomello6,*
1Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
2Institute for Computational Biomedicine, New York, NY, USA
3Department of Biochemistry, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences & Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi, India
4School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Derby DE22 3DT, UK
5European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK
6Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
7KBR, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
8Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of T€ubingen, T€ubingen 72076, Germany
9NGS Competence Center T€ubingen (NCCT), University of T€ubingen, T€ubingen, German
10yuri GmbH, Meckenbeuren, Germany
11Axiom Space, Houston, TX, USA
12Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
13The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, New York, NY, USA
14The WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, New York, NY, USA
15Centro de Investigaciones Biolo´ gicas Margarita Salas (CSIC), Madrid 28040, Spain
16Department of Biomedical Sciences, Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA
17Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, Msida, Malta
18These authors contributed equally
*Correspondence: stefania.giacomello@scilifelab.se
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crmeth.2022.100325
SUMMARY
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) have experienced
rapid development in recent years. The ﬁndings of spaceﬂight-based scRNA-seq and SRT investigations
are likely to improve our understanding of life in space and our comprehension of gene expression in various
cell systems and tissue dynamics. However, compared to their Earth-based counterparts, gene expression
experiments conducted in spaceﬂight have not experienced the same pace of development. Out of the hun-
dreds of spaceﬂight gene expression datasets available, only a few used scRNA-seq and SRT. In this
perspective piece, we explore the growing importance of scRNA-seq and SRT in space biology and discuss
the challenges and considerations relevant to robust experimental design to enable growth of these methods
in the ﬁeld.
INTRODUCTION
For decades, the health risks associated with space exploration
have been increasingly documented and characterized. For
some of these risks, countermeasures have been sufﬁciently
developed to sustain human health in low-Earth orbit, the
orbital distance from Earth that includes the International Space
Station (ISS). However, as humankind plans for a permanent
presence on the moon and seeks to advance to Mars, the limits
to our countermeasures and the research gaps that have inso-
far remained unaddressed will create health challenges that
rival
the
engineering
challenges
of
long-duration
space
missions.
To gain a comprehensive understanding of how spaceﬂight af-
fects the human body, the molecular responses of the body to
spaceﬂight factors must be robustly proﬁled. Recent advances
in omics technologies have already revolutionized our approach
to understanding disease1–3 and have created new pathways for
tackling health challenges on Earth.4–6 However, the spaceﬂight
environment presents a unique set of factors where the genomic
impact is largely unknown. Furthermore, the microgravity and ra-
diation environment of space remains difﬁcult to model on Earth.
Therefore, given that the opportunities to study the inﬂuence of
spaceﬂight on the human genome have historically been, and
still are, limited, it is of paramount importance to perform all
omics experiments in spaceﬂight to the highest standards.
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022 ª 2022 The Authors.
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS

The ISS is currently the only research laboratory available off-
world and the source of the majority of spaceﬂight omics exper-
iments performed to date. Most mammalian omics studies
aboard the ISS have used Mus musculus, the standard labora-
tory rodent, as a model organism.7 To scale the number of
mammalian studies performed in space, NASA launched their
rodent research (RR) program in 2014, with the ﬁrst omics exper-
iment published in the NASA funded GeneLab database in
2015.8,9 Since the program began, the RR program has launched
over a dozen missions generating a steady stream of new omics
data on a variety of murine tissues and cell systems. These mis-
sions have proven essential for understanding the molecular
response of terrestrial life to the environmental stressors of
space by providing gene expression data for a subset of
mouse tissues. These studies have helped illuminate changes
within biological systems including the mitochondria,10 muscu-
loskeletal system,11 circadian rhythm,12 and microRNA (miRNA)
proﬁles.13
The majority of experiments from rodent tissue obtained via
the RR missions have been subject to bulk RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq), where the whole tissue is homogenized and RNA is
extracted. Bulk transcriptomic assays are currently the most
common omics assay performed in space biology, with more
than 270 transcriptomic datasets available from spaceﬂight
and spaceﬂight-analogue experiments in the NASA GeneLab
database.7 Of these studies, microarray-based experiments
have been used to obtain approximately half of the gene expres-
sion data stored in GeneLab. As the cost of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) decreased, RNA-seq started to replace mi-
croarrays as the predominant method for spaceﬂight transcrip-
tomic studies. However, given recent advances in the ﬁeld of ge-
nomics, bulk RNA-seq is being displaced by higher-resolution
methods rapidly on Earth. State-of-the-art tools can now resolve
gene expression at the single-cell level via single-cell RNA-seq
(scRNA-seq)14 or maintain 2D topography via spatially resolved
transcriptomics (SRT).15 While these two types of approaches
are becoming standard practice for gene expression research
conducted on Earth, the collection protocols for cells and tissues
obtained from experiments in spaceﬂight have not yet been opti-
mized for the application of these methods.
In this perspective piece, we present the current status of
scRNA-seq and SRT in spaceﬂight experiments, the optimal tis-
sue preservation protocols that should be implemented to
ensure the success of these experiments, and the downstream
computational tools that are used to obtain high-resolution
gene expression insights.
scRNA-SEQ: IMPORTANCE TO SPACEFLIGHT AND
PRIOR ISS STUDY DESIGNS
In less than a decade, the ﬁeld of scRNA-seq has matured and
produced multiple robust protocols for examining the gene
expression of individual cells. This has resulted in a paradigm
shift in the ﬁeld of transcriptomics that has enabled the identiﬁ-
cation of new cell types, uncovered rare cell populations, re-
vealed cellular heterogeneity, charted cell-lineage trajectories
during development and disease, and proﬁled the perturbation
of cellular states.16–21
scRNA-seq also has great potential when applied to cell sys-
tems and tissues exposed to spaceﬂight. While gene expression
changes have been observed in cell systems and tissues, the
exact cell populations driving these expression differences
have not yet been characterized. For example, large changes
in gene expression have been observed in the murine retina,22
but the differences attributable to speciﬁc retinal subpopula-
tions, such as rod photoreceptors, cone photoreceptors, retinal
ganglion cells, bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and horizontal cells,
have yet to be pinpointed. Similarly, differences in immune func-
tion have been observed during spaceﬂight in the past,23–25
where the application of scRNA-seq would have enabled further
dissection of speciﬁc gene expression differences in the cell
populations of, for example, peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs), thymus tissue, and bone marrow. Overall, the possibil-
ity of identifying exact cell populations that are dysregulated dur-
ing spaceﬂight enables the development of more precise thera-
peutics and countermeasures.
While there is a spectrum of approaches for scRNA-seq that
have been applied across ground-based experiments, only two
platforms (Chromium by 10X Genomics and Rhapsody Single-
Cell Analysis System by BD Biosciences) have been applied to
samples ﬂown in spaceﬂight.26,27 These were applied to two ex-
periments: the second rodent research reference mission
(RRRM-2) and the NASA Twins Study. In both, single-cell sus-
pensions were obtained, cells were physically isolated from
one another, and polyadenylated mRNA was captured using oli-
go(dT)s that were uniquely labeled per cell to differentiate mRNA
of different cells in the experiment.
In the RRRM-2 experiment, 40 mice were ﬂown to the ISS and
were part of four distinct groups distinguished by age, duration
spent on the ISS, and whether the animal was ISS-terminal or
Earth-acclimatized after live animal return (LAR) (Figure 1A). A
matching set of 40 mice were also housed on Earth to serve as
a ground control. Out of the 80 mice between the ground control
and spaceﬂight groups, 16 animals that were part of the LAR
group were selected for single-cell sequencing. Single-cell
sequencing of spleen tissue, PBMCs, humerus bone marrow,
and femur bone marrow was performed using the 10X Genomics
Chromium platform. Data for these experiments are publicly
available in GeneLab28–31 (Table 1) and analysis of these data-
sets is underway in NASA’s Analysis Working Groups (https://
genelab.nasa.gov/awg/charter).
The only other published experiment that has used scRNA-
seq from a spaceﬂight study is the NASA Twins Study.32 In this
experiment, a set of identical twins participated in a set of omics
assays. One twin served as a ground control and remained on
Earth while the other twin spent 340 days aboard the ISS. For
scRNA-seq, whole blood was collected via venipuncture into
cell processing tubes (CPTs) containing sodium citrate as a pre-
servative (Figure 1B). The CPTs were returned immediately to the
lab and centrifuged to collect PBMCs. The BD Biosciences
Single-Cell Analysis System was used to collect single-cell
expression data (Table 1). One important caveat to this study
is that there was no in-ﬂight time point, and blood was collected
for scRNA-seq pre-launch and post-landing.13,33 The time it
takes to return cargo, such as CPTs, to Earth is one of the
factors limiting the ease of single-cell experiments. CPTs can
2
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

be spun-down and frozen before returning to Earth, but this
direct freezing process will lyse cells. With cell lysis, it is still
possible to generate a sample-wide RNA-seq proﬁle but not at
single-cell resolution. To generate single-cell proﬁles from
spaceﬂight samples, cells will need to be either returned to Earth
immediately or cells will need to be preserved using a process
that prevents lysis.
SPATIALLY RESOLVED TRANSCRIPTOMICS:
LEVERAGING LEGACY SAMPLES AND STEPS FOR
PROPER EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN PRIOR TO
SPACEFLIGHT
While scRNA-seq has greatly improved gene expression exper-
iments, it does have one major limitation: the loss of locational in-
formation due to breakdown of tissues into single-cell suspen-
sions. This makes it difﬁcult to identify gene expression
changes that may correlate with the topology of the tissue and
limits our ability to decipher cell-to-cell interactions and microen-
vironment-level changes. In order to retain locational informa-
tion, a variety of SRT methods have been developed in recent
years (see Table 2 for a list of recent SRT methods)15,34,35 and
applied to a range of sample and tissue types.36–39
Due to various complexities in data collection and analysis,
SRT methods are less mature than scRNA-seq methods. Addi-
tionally, because of the requirement that tissues remain intact
during the SRT workﬂow, these methods are also more sensitive
to the tissue types and structures selected for study. This poses
an extra challenge when SRT methods are to be applied to leg-
acy space-ﬂown samples that were collected and stored without
planning SRT studies from the start of the missions and their
morphology is not fully preserved. For these reasons, we believe
improvements can be made in the tissue collection process to
better preserve tissue morphology. Speciﬁcally, when designing
future studies to be performed in spaceﬂight, where specimens
will undergo SRT analysis, experiments should ﬁrst be optimized
Figure 1. scRNA-seq datasets from spaceﬂight samples
(A) Design for the rodent research reference mission 2 (RRRM-2) experiment. In RRRM-2, two age groups of mice were launched to the ISS. After 32 days, half of
the mice from each age group returned to Earth, where they lived 24 additional days before dissection. This was time-matched with the remaining groups of mice
in orbit, which were euthanized and frozen in-ﬂight. Sixteen mice total were selected for scRNA-seq using the 10X Genomics platform. Four cell/tissue types were
selected for scRNA-seq, and they each have an associated GeneLab Dataset (GLDS) publicly available: femur bone marrow (GLDS-402), humerus bone marrow
(GLDS-403), PBMCs (GLDS-404), and spleen tissue (GLDS-405).
(B) PBMCs from human blood were obtained before and after spaceﬂight on the ISS as part of the NASA Twins Study. Whole blood was obtained using veni-
puncture into a sodium citrate cell processing tube (CPT) and PBMCs were obtained from the buffy coat after centrifugation of the CPT.
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
3
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

on Earth before being translated to experiments performed in
space. The overall testing cycle for SRT techniques can be
divided into three phases: (1) tissue evaluation, (2) tissue prepa-
ration, and (3) 2D RNA analysis.
Tissue evaluation will require selection of the proper area of in-
terest of the tissue, which may vary in length, width, and thick-
ness depending on the SRT method of interest. Tissue prepara-
tion will require testing to determine the optimal duration of
exposure to the ﬁxative agent, which may vary depending on tis-
sue type and method of ﬁxation (e.g., ﬂash frozen [FF], formalin-
ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded [FFPE] tissue, or a different method). It
should be noted that most SRT methods to date have been vali-
dated with FF and FFPE tissues (Table 2). The third phase, 2D
RNA analysis, will analyze the RNA spatial distribution in the tis-
sue under study by applying one of the SRT methods available at
the time of the experiment (Table 2). Due to the scarce availability
of tissues ﬂown in spaceﬂight, it is critical that SRT researchers
employ a testing cycle before proceeding to their spaceﬂight
samples.
TISSUE PRESERVATION: CHALLENGES IN
SPACEFLIGHT AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
IMPROVEMENT
Good sample preservation is instrumental to the application of
scRNA-seq and SRT on tissues from spaceﬂight. This stands
in contrast to bulk RNA-seq, where RNA is collected and pooled
from hundreds of thousands to millions of cells. The sheer vol-
ume of RNA collected from these many cells means that partial
tissue degradation can occur and still yield enough RNA for
sequencing. The tolerance threshold for RNA degradation is
much lower for scRNA-seq and SRT due to the high-resolution
nature of these methods, compared to bulk RNA-seq. For
scRNA-seq and SRT, sufﬁcient RNA for sequencing must be ob-
tained from a smaller number of cells.
RNA is known to degrade quickly and can undergo rapid pro-
ﬁle changes and degradation in relatively short periods of time
resulting in measurable differences within 5 to 10 min of remain-
ing at room temperature postmortem.57 Additionally, RNA that is
not preserved rapidly is subject to degradation that can create
distinct RNA-seq proﬁles, and different RNA transcripts can
degrade at different rates.58,59 To account for this, samples in-
tended for scRNA-seq must be preserved rapidly after eutha-
nasia. If the experiment requires single-cell sequencing, the cells
should be immediately placed in cryopreservation media and
slowly brought to freezing temperature to ensure cells do not
lyse during the freezing process. Additionally, tissues should
be dissociated prior to freezing. Dissociation after freezing is
likely to cause damage to cell membranes and increase the likeli-
hood of RNA leakage due to the stresses of the freezing process.
An alternative to immediate dissociation is the application of
single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) where isolation of nuclei
can be performed on frozen material, and the nuclei are subse-
quently used as input for single-cell sequencing.60 In this case,
tissue samples can forgo cryopreservation media and should
be brought down to freezing temperatures as quickly as
possible, ideally snap-freezing the samples in liquid nitrogen if
available. Comparisons of snRNA-seq and scRNA-seq in mouse
lungs have shown that they have similar gene detection rates,
and dissociation bias is reduced in snRNA-seq.61 Likewise,
comparisons in kidneys showed similar gene detection rates.62
The recently completed Fly Cell Atlas63 utilized snRNA-seq
instead of scRNA-seq because it can be applied consistently
even in problematic tissue type (e.g., antennae, wings, fat
bodies) and multinucleated cells (e.g., muscle) and because
70%–90%
of
transcriptomic
information
is
retained
with
snRNA-seq.63 Moreover, nuclei can be applied as input for sin-
gle-cell multiomics studies where both the RNA and chromatin
accessibility information is captured from the same nucleus
simultaneously. Thus, this approach can be extended in space-
ﬂight experiments in the future.
Similarly, samples intended for SRT should be frozen immedi-
ately after dissection, ideally in a protective embedding medium.
This approach preserves both RNA quality and morphology of
the tissue. Most of legacy tissues obtained from the ISS did
not undergo immediate embedding and freezing for morphology
preservation. In the majority of cases, individual organs were not
dissected in-ﬂight, but instead were frozen as a whole carcass
Table 1. scRNA-seq datasets from spaceﬂight
ID
Link
Mission
Tissue
Organism
GLDS-402
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/
genelab/accession/GLDS-402/
RRRM-2
femur bone marrow
C57BL/6NTac mice
GLDS-403
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/
genelab/accession/GLDS-403/
RRRM-2
humerus bone marrow
C57BL/6NTac mice
GLDS-404
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/
genelab/accession/GLDS-404/
RRRM-2
PBMCs
C57BL/6NTac mice
GLDS-405
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/
genelab/accession/GLDS-405/
RRRM-2
Spleen
C57BL/6NTac mice
LSDA
available upon request to the NASA LSDA
NASA Twin Study
PBMCs
human
A complete list of scRNA-seq datasets from samples exposed to spaceﬂight. Four datasets are from the RRRM-2 mission and are available on
GeneLab. One dataset is from the NASA Twin Study and is part of the NASA Life Sciences Data Archive (LSDA). Due to privacy concerns around human
genomic data, the Twin Study data is not publicly available but can be requested. The LSDA has a public-facing portal where data requests can be
initiated (https://nlsp.nasa.gov/explore/entryform/lsda_data_requests/lsda_data_requests). The LSDA team provides the appropriate processes,
tools, and secure infrastructure for archival of experimental data and dissemination while complying with applicable rules, regulations, policies,
and procedures governing the management and archival of sensitive data and information.
4
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

on the ISS. These samples were returned to Earth where they
were thawed, dissected, and re-frozen until ready for down-
stream sequencing approaches, mostly in bulk. Due to the ne-
cessity of organ dissection back in the laboratory on Earth,
many rodent samples exposed to the space environment have
undergone this double-freezing procedure.64–68 However, this
process might lead to partial RNA degradation and deformation
of cell and tissue anatomical shape if speciﬁc strategies for tis-
sue morphology preservation were not taken into account at
the time of freezing. Any deformation can make application of
spatial methods very challenging and, in some cases, unﬁt for
SRT methods.
There is also evidence that whole-carcass preservation
leads to different gene expression proﬁles than tissues
dissected in-ﬂight. One study has demonstrated that whole-
carcass preservation in-ﬂight leads to greater variability in
RNA integrity numbers (RINs) than tissue dissected in-ﬂight.69
Another study compared bulk RNA-seq proﬁles between
mouse liver tissue dissected and frozen directly on the ISS
compared to mice preserved as frozen whole carcasses
with their liver tissue dissected back on Earth.70 This study
notes that whole-carcass preservation in RNAlater can better
preserve the tissues; however, there are a few caveats to this
approach. The ﬁrst caveat is that RNAlater has only had
limited success in preserving cells for scRNA-seq on Earth71
and will require further optimization before its application
can be recommended for such experiments in spaceﬂight.
The second consideration is that RNAlater can induce a
unique gene expression response due to the sulfates present
in the solution.72 These gene expression responses may be
uneven in SRT methods due to the diffusion gradient gener-
ated as RNAlater disperses across a tissue. Third, RNAlater
is not a ﬁxative agent and has not been tested to our knowl-
edge at the time of writing for compatibility with ﬁxative re-
agents used in various SRT methods.
Despite the uncertainties in using RNAlater in scRNA-seq and
SRT experiments, there is precedent for preserving nucleic acids
with RNAlater on the ISS for other sequencing experiments (Ta-
ble 3). Other reagents with a success in preserving cells and/or
nucleic acids on the ISS include using NOTOXhisto, 10% neutral
buffer formation (NBF), 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), and the
sequential use of trypsin followed by RNAprotect (Table 3). How-
ever, these preservatives are not necessarily suitable for scRNA-
seq and SRT due to the lack of testing with scRNA-seq and SRT
platforms or due to cell lysis that occurs during the preservation
process. The current options with a track record on the ISS are
the slow and fast freeze methods to store the tissue at a temper-
ature that will preserve RNA and spatial tissue structure. 80C
freezers available on the ISS can be used to bring tissues down
to freezing temperatures, but without a snap-freezing step, this
process occurs slowly. To solve this problem, a rapid-freeze in-
strument was added to the ISS to rapidly bring sample temper-
atures down to 185C, to compete with snap-freezing methods
that make use of liquid nitrogen that is easily available and safely
Table 2. SRT methods
SRT Technique
Sample type
Preservation technique
Resolution
References
ISS
(padlock probe & RCA)
cells and tissue
FF or FFPE
single cell (transcript level)
Ke et al., 201340
FISH
cells and tissue
FF
single cell (transcript level)
Lubeck et al., 201441
Tomo-seq
tissue slice
FF
multiple cells
Junker et al., 201442
TIVA
intact live cells
none
single cell
Lovatt et al., 201443
FISSEQ
cells and tissue
FF or FFPE
single cell
(Lee et al., 2015)44
MERFISH/MER SCOPE
cells and tissue
FF or FFPE
single cell (transcript level/
100 nm)
Mofﬁtt et al., 201645
LCM-seq
tissue
FF or FFPE
multiple cells
Nichterwitz et al., 201646
10X Genomics Visium
cells and tissue
FF or FFPE
multiple cells (55 mm)
Sta˚ hl et al., 201647
Geo-seq
cells and tissue
FF or FFPE
multiple cells
Chen et al., 201748
STARmap
tissue
FF
single cell
Wang et al., 201849
HDST
tissue
FF
near single cell (2 mm)
Vickovic et al., 201950
DBiT-Seq
cells and tissue
FF or FFPE
near single cell (10 mm)
Liu et al., 202051
NanoString GeoMx
tissue
FF or FFPE
multiple cells
Zollinger et al., 202052
SlideSeq2
tissue
FF
near single cell (10 mm)
Stickels et al., 202153
BGI scStereo-seq
tissue
FF
single cell (transcript level/
500 nm)
Xia et al., 202154
Resolve Biosciences
Molecular Cartography
tissue
FF
single cell (transcript level/
200 nm)
Groiss et al., 202155
NanoString CosMx
tissue
FF or FFPE
single cell (transcript level/
50 nm)
He et al., 202156
An evolving list of SRT methods. Acronyms used: ISS, in situ sequencing; LCM-seq, laser capture microdissection; TIVA, transcriptome in vivo anal-
ysis; HDST, high deﬁnition spatial transcriptomics; FF, ﬂash frozen; FFPE, formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded. Note that this list is not extensive, and
there are several more SRT approaches available. Preference was given to newly developed or unique methods.
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
5
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

applied on Earth but not a safe option in a space-based lab73–76
(Table 3).
There are two options that can help address these challenges
moving forward: in-ﬂight tissue dissection and LAR. In-ﬂight tis-
sue dissection will allow tissues of interest to be rapidly frozen,
as smaller pieces of tissue freeze faster than a whole carcass,
and will avoid the double freeze-thaw that tissues undergo if
they are dissected from a frozen carcass back on Earth. The
drawback to this approach is that tissue dissection is time-inten-
sive and will require specialized crew training to teach dissection
competency. Despite the time commitment required for in-ﬂight
dissection, it has been performed in select cases, such as hin-
dlimb dissection during the RR-6 mission,92 though the data
from this in-ﬂight dissection are not publicly available. The sec-
ond approach, LAR, returns organisms to Earth while still alive
where they are euthanized after returning to a ground-based
lab.93,94 This allows tissues to be preserved according to the
highest standards but presents a different set of limitations. Us-
ing LAR, organisms have their circadian rhythms disrupted and
experience the stressful conditions of atmospheric re-entry.
Moreover, depending on the study design of the mission, LAR or-
ganisms have the opportunity to begin reacclimating to Earth’s
gravity and radiation landscape. Therefore, all three aspects
can impact their transcriptomic proﬁles.
Overall, in spite of the associated limitations, using one of
these two options will help circumvent some of the challenges
related to the applicability of scRNA-seq and SRT methods on
spaceﬂight samples.
ADVANCING OFF-WORLD CAPABILITIES:
CONSIDERATIONS FOR PERFORMING scRNA-SEQ AND
SRT IN SPACEFLIGHT
After the challenge of achieving more rigorous preservation stan-
dards for scRNA-seq and SRT methods is met, the next goal
should be to increase the capabilities of molecular biology ex-
periments in space. Ideally, RNA extractions, PCR, and even
scRNA-seq and SRT itself should be performed during space-
ﬂight. Achieving this will require the development of workﬂows
compatible with microgravity and more sophisticated worksta-
tions for performing molecular biology experiments.
The capabilities for performing molecular biology experi-
ments have increased dramatically over the past decade. In
2016, the ﬁrst biomolecule sequencer, the Oxford Nanopore
MinION, was demonstrated to work in microgravity aboard
the ISS.95 Since then, the repertoire of molecular biology exper-
iments performed in-ﬂight has expanded to include environ-
mental
microbial
sampling,
plasmid
transformation,
DNA
extraction, PCR ampliﬁcation, and library prep.96–98 While the
original biomolecular sequencer study sequenced Mus muscu-
lus DNA libraries (prepared on Earth),95 others have been pri-
marily deﬁned in scope of microbial organisms and not to multi-
cellular model organisms, such as C. elegans, Drosophila
melanogaster, and Mus musculus, or to human samples. In or-
der to build a spaceﬂight lab capable of performing scRNA-seq
and SRT (methods that are most frequently applied to multicel-
lular organisms) the molecular biology pipeline for handling
Table 3. Preservation strategies aboard the ISS
Tissue Preservation on ISS
Properties
Reference
RNAlater
(1) non-toxic
(2) stabilizes cellular RNA
(3) eliminates the requirement of immediate
freezing of samples
Choi et al., 2016; Gupta et al., 2015; Herranz
et al., 2019; Manzano et al., 2020;
Paul et al., 2012, 2005; Schultz et al., 2013;
Vandenbrink et al., 2019; Villacampa et al.,
2021; Wnorowski et al., 201977–86
NOTOXhisto
(1) cell-ﬁxative
(2) substitute for formalin
Balsamo et al., 2014; Cockell et al.,
202087,88
10% neutral buffer formation (NBF)
(1) less toxic
(2) low cost
(3) penetrates tissue relatively fast
(4) random cross linking of proteins
(5) chemical modiﬁcation of nucleic acids
Zamarioli et al., 202189
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
(1) preservation of morphology
(2) limited use for RNA extraction
(3) formaldehyde is toxic
Huang et al., 202090
Trypsin, RNAprotect, and
95C storage
(1) stabilizes cellular RNA
(2) lyses cells
Huang et al., 202090
Slow freeze
(80C freezers or colder)
(1) good for cellular preservation
(2) requires specialized equipment
(3) formation of ice crystal artifacts
Choi et al., 2020; Hong et al., 202169,91
Rapid freeze to 185C
(1) rapid freezing through conduction
(2) good for cellular preservation
(3) requires specialized equipment
(4) high Cost
(5) avoids ice crystal formation
Andersen et al., 2005; Saravia-Butler et al.,
2020b, 2020c, 2020a73–76
A list of strategies used for cell, tissue, and nucleic acids preservations that have been previously used in experiments in spaceﬂight.
6
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

tissues post-dissection throughout the sequencing process
must be more well deﬁned.
Additionally, due to the sensitive nature of RNA, additional lab-
oratory decontamination protocols may need translation to
spaceﬂight. RNase inhibitors will need to be available to wipe
down workstations, pipettes, gloves, and any other surfaces
the sample may come in contact with. A microbially decontami-
nated environment would also enhance the quality of RNA ob-
tained, particularly the use of 70% ethanol, isopropanol, or
another disinfectant, given the microbe-rich surfaces aboard
the ISS.96,97,99 However, the use of ethanol and isopropanol
on the ISS is an issue because aerosolized alcohol interferes
with the environmental control and life support systems
(ECLSSs) in the closed-loop space station environment (J. Perry
et al., 2016, 46th International Conference on Environmental
Systems, conference).
Moreover, the workstation used for handling samples should
have minimal airﬂow that would pass dust or other airborne par-
ticulates across the workstation. Some of these considerations
may be met via use of the Microgravity Science Glovebox100
aboard the ISS to control airﬂow and by using benzalkonium
chloride (BZK) wipes in place of alcohol-based disinfectants. Es-
tablishing and following general guidelines, regularly applied
when preparing samples for scRNA-seq and SRT, will help
create consistency in sample retrieval, prevent RNA degrada-
tion, and obtain high-quality data from spaceﬂight samples in
which RNA quantity and quality are not compromised. One
caveat to performing scRNA-seq and SRT methods in space-
ﬂight is that it will require additional crew time to complete exper-
iments that are typically done on Earth after sample return. Ro-
botic automation can help overcome these challenges by
reducing the amount of time that crew will need to spend
executing experiments (Figure 2A). For example, automated im-
aging has already been performed aboard the ISS.101 Addition-
ally, automation of library preparation steps has been performed
on Earth from a spatially barcoded chip array similar to the 10X
Genomics Visium format102 as well as from 10X Genomics Vis-
ium arrays.103 However, due to strict volume and mass limita-
tions in-ﬂight, compact solutions may need to be investigated,
as would speciﬁc testing to accommodate microgravity-driven
changes in ﬂuidic behavior. Automating these processes and
translating them to spaceﬂight-compatible hardware will alle-
viate potential time-costs placed on the crew by performing
these experiments in-ﬂight in their entirety.
Another challenge involves the abundance of data generated
by sequencing and imaging experiments, which would all need
to be stored in-ﬂight and downlinked to Earth. This is particularly
relevant to SRT data, which involves either the generation of
large fastq ﬁles or multiple high-resolution images. To mitigate
data downlink challenges, automated software pipelines could
be executed in-ﬂight and could convert data into formats with
decreased ﬁle size. This processed data could then be down-
linked to Earth instead of larger, raw ﬁles. Thus, onboard data
processing could decrease delays in data analysis caused by
the transfer of large ﬁles. Full transcriptomics analysis pipelines
could even be conducted in space, where results, such as differ-
entially expressed genes (DEGs) and enriched pathways, could
be automatically extracted from transcriptomic data in-ﬂight
(Figure 2A). Additionally, these results could also be used as
feedback to optimize experimental parameters in-ﬂight and in-
crease the quality of future transcriptomic experiments per-
formed in space.
BIOINFORMATIC PIPELINES AND CONSIDERATIONS
FOR SRT IN SPACEFLIGHT EXPERIMENTS
Transcriptomic analyses for bulk RNA-seq and scRNA-seq are
relatively well deﬁned compared to SRT. For bulk RNA-seq,
NASA GeneLab has developed an RNA-seq consensus pipeline
(RCP) to standardize processing of short-read RNA-seq data,104
which builds upon standard recommendations in the ﬁeld.105
The RCP is accessible at the NASA GeneLab_Data_Processing
Github
repository.
However,
a
standardized
pipeline
for
scRNA-seq is not yet available from NASA GeneLab or interna-
tional space omics consortia, such as ISSOP (International
Standards for Space Omics Processing) or the ESA-funded
Space Omics Topical Team. Data analysis for scRNA-seq pre-
sents many unique challenges related to inferring cell trajec-
tories, clustering cell types, identifying and ﬁltering doublets
(when two cells are mistakenly considered as a single cell),
handling of sparsity in gene expression count tables, and
deﬁning ﬂexible statistical frameworks for discovering complex
differential patterns in gene expression.106 Despite these chal-
lenges, standardized methods, analysis frameworks, and tuto-
rials are available,107–109 which can be extended to analysis of
data from space ﬂight experiments.
In comparison, the establishment of best practices for the
analysis of SRT data is a work in progress. The advent of SRT al-
lows for solving the spatial distribution of transcripts, as well as
locating cell types and cell states in complex tissues, organs,
and organoids. Standardizing analysis across a wide variety of
tissue conﬁgurations and the large number of emerging technol-
ogies is a difﬁcult and complex task. Knowledge of the types of
software tools available for each method can help inform exper-
imental selection decisions about which SRT method best
matches the speciﬁc scientiﬁc questions under investigation.
Widely, there are two types of SRT data: single-cell resolution
and multi-cell pixel resolution. SRT single-cell resolution data
enable the researchers to quantify absolute transcript counts
per cell and produce cell gene count tables comparable to
scRNA-seq experiments. However, the data are often imaging-
based and thus limited in the amount of genes detected in one
experiment. On the other hand, the SRT multi-cell pixel resolu-
tion data present multiple cells per region of interest and use
cell type deconvolution algorithms and label transfer/projection
from additional reference scRNA-seq datasets to resolve the
cell type composition of the whole-transcriptome region of inter-
est. Regardless of the resolution level of the SRT technique
selected, available software packages, for example Seurat110
and Squidpy,111 offer compatibility with several SRT technolo-
gies because the structure of the data is similar, meaning that
the majority of information comes from transcript counts. Spatial
coordinates and cell-level information can be stored as meta-
data portions of the data object. Both tools include methods
for QC (quality control) and preprocessing, normalization,
dimensionality reduction, clustering, and visualization in spatial
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
7
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

coordinates and ﬁnding spatially variable and spatial marker
genes (Figure 2B). However, these do not support data process-
ing and analysis for all SRT methods.
Specialized tools have also been developed for cluster anal-
ysis,112,113 fusion transcript detection,114 visualization,115 de-
convolution of cell-type mixtures,116 inference of extracellular in-
teracting genes,117 identiﬁcation of sub-tissue architecture/
anatomization, ﬁnding spatially variable genes,118–120 quanti-
fying spatial heterogeneity,121 imputation of missing mRNA
expression,122 or improvement of gene expression quantiﬁca-
tion using spatial, temporal and experimental coordinates. More-
over, comprehensive tools such as STutility builds on the Seurat
framework to facilitate analyzing and visualizing multiple sam-
ples from the 10X Genomics Visium platform.123 Integration
across data types also gives these tools increased investigative
potential. For example, integration of single-cell and spatial tran-
scriptomics data, achieved with tools such as cell2location124
and stereoscope125 to name a few, can enhance spatial tran-
scriptomics resolution to an unprecedented level.126 Moreover,
integration of gene expression data with histology information
and spatial location using machine learning (ML) is also under
active research.127 For instance, the framework Squidpy is inter-
connected with Scanpy and the ML Python ecosystem.111
Despite these advances, challenges associated with meta-
data standards and data processing exist, including reliable
cell segmentation, cell-type identiﬁcation, integration of expres-
sion patterns to anatomical features, ﬁnding complex patterns,
integration of data from different specimens, time points or per-
turbations, development of standardized metrics and bench-
marks, as well as integration across multiple technologies.128
Other analytical challenges remain for the analysis of SRT
data, including those related to sample mapping and image
registration and segmentation, data representation, imputation
of sparse spatial data, integration of multi-modal data, and auto-
matic inference of knowledge for the combination of tissue struc-
ture and molecular data.111
While the above challenges exist for both terrestrial and
spaceﬂight SRT data, some are more speciﬁc to spaceﬂight
studies due to the problems related to sample collection and
processing, such as the formation of ice crystals,129 which can
cause morphology changes and tissue damage leading to
altered spatial information. In data derived from spaceﬂight ex-
periments, true morphological and transcriptional variability
that results from exposure to microgravity and radiation should
not be confused with artifacts created by sample collection,
preservation, and transportation. Therefore, if artifacts due to
confounding factors cannot be sufﬁciently minimized via sample
processing protocols or speciﬁc experimental design, software
tools aiming to remove confounding factors (for example, cells
affected by ice crystals), improve transcript quantiﬁcation, and
reconstruct morphology and architecture of damaged tissue us-
ing image processing techniques will be essential. Speciﬁcally,
reconstruction of deformed images using image registration or
image deconvolution/restoration techniques and the develop-
ment of computational tools to elucidate space-driven modiﬁca-
tion of tissue organization will warrant investigation.
Figure 2. Computational analysis of spatial transcriptomics data
(A) Shows the ﬂow of data that could be unlocked with increased computational automation. The right column shows sequential steps of proposed computational
automation onboard spacecraft, with the dotted lines to boxes on the left showing opportunities to transfer data back to Earth.
(B) Example of data analysis workﬂow from the 10X Genomics Visium on the ‘‘Mouse Brain Serial Section 2 (Sagittal-Posterior)’’ dataset available through the 10X
Genomics Dataset portal (https://www.10xgenomics.com/resources/datasets). Dataset analyzed with Seurat.
8
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR OMICS TECHNOLOGY IN
SPACEFLIGHT
The aging ISS, destined to reach its end of life by 2030, has cata-
lyzed an era of ‘‘commercial space,’’ which promises rapid
development of the ﬁnal frontier. To avoid a gap in continuous
human presence in space, four private companies are aiming
to build and operate commercial space stations in low-Earth
orbit. Axiom Space will launch and attach the ﬁrst segment of
its modular space station to the ISS in 2024 and build the
remainder of the station while attached to the ISS. The
completed Axiom Station will detach to become a free ﬂier by
2030 (https://techcrunch.com/2021/11/30/nasa-details-intent-to-
replace-the-international-space-station-with-a-commercial-space-
station-by-2030/). Blue Origin has partnered with Sierra Space to
build Orbital Reef, while StarLab will be born out of a partnership
between Nanoracks, Voyager Space, and Lockheed Martin. The
fourth, yet to be named, space station development effort is being
led by Northrup Grumman (https://news.northropgrumman.com/
news/releases/northrop-grumman-signs-agreement-with-nasa-to-
design-space-station-for-low-earth-orbit). Furthermore, advances
in rocket technology, including reusable engines, have lowered
launch costs signiﬁcantly and increased the cadence of space-
ﬂights to and from the ISS. For example, SpaceX Crew-4
launched to the ISS less than 2 days after Ax-1, Axiom’s private
astronaut mission to the ISS, returned to Earth.
Research in space has been fundamental to our understanding
of how to survive and thrive in the weightless environment. Our
knowledge and sophistication of scientiﬁc investigations in space
is continuously strengthened by advances in hardware technol-
ogy and operations. Numerous hardware options for biological in-
vestigations that require cell culture capabilities and maintenance
of live specimen in spaceﬂight, for instance, are already available.
A few examples of include Biopack,130 SABL from BioServe
Space Technologies (T. Niederwieser, 2015, 45th International
Conference on Environmental Systems, conference), Kubik,131
NanoRacks Frame-3, STaARS-1 EF132, and the CubeLab from
Space Tango.133 A more current system called the ScienceTaxi
(https://www.yurigravity.com/our-service)
developed
by
Yuri
Gravity can be integrated into the ISS and into the newer stations
coming online; an autonomous version of the ScienceTaxi is in
development. This small sampling of hardware options is indica-
tive of the demand for laboratory equipment that is operational
in a weightless space environment and the importance of biolog-
ical experiments conducted in space.
Now, in this new era of commercial space with new space sta-
tions in development, there is an unprecedented opportunity to
leverage past research experiences in space to re-think and
re-design future technologies and laboratories for spaceﬂight in-
vestigations that are on-par with Earth technologies, yet not
limited by gravity-based thinking. For example, the speed of
technology and methodology innovation for scRNA-seq and
SRT is advancing the ﬁeld rapidly for terrestrial investigations.
Future scRNA-seq and SRT methodologies will enable simulta-
neous multi-omic measurements from individual cells and spatial
regions. The potential of these developments has already been
commercially realized for single-cell methodologies by 10X Ge-
nomics, whose Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression
kits offer simultaneous measurement of scRNA-seq and chro-
matin accessibility (ATAC-seq) data from the same group of
cells.134,135 Similar developments are in motion for SRT where
co-mapping of mRNAs and proteins in a formaldehyde-ﬁxed tis-
sue section via NGS has already been achieved.51 Moreover,
spatially resolved ATAC-seq has been developed,136,137 but
does not yet allow for simultaneous measurement of RNA. Given
the trajectory of the single-cell and spatial ﬁelds toward simulta-
neous measurements of multiple genomic features, it is antici-
pated that the need for improved cell and tissue preservation
protocols in spaceﬂight will persist.
In addition to these creative workarounds, there is an opportu-
nity to design and invent new paradigms for conducting omics
and other biological research in space. Space scientists must
deﬁne the requirements for on-orbit research protocols and
outline the speciﬁc types of research investigations important
to conduct in space, the tools and capabilities necessary for
those space investigations, and the criteria for acceptable high-
quality science on orbit. These requirements will serve as a guide
for commercial space station developers in deﬁning their own
orbital lab designs, including hardware capabilities and services.
Armed with an understanding of the types of equipment required
to conduct the research, commercial space station developers
would be better equipped to consider partnerships with terres-
trial technology developers that are leading the rapid advances
in omics technology and encourage them to adapt their technol-
ogies for a weightless space environment by developing future it-
erations of their technology with space constraints in mind.
Although launch costs are reducing and launch frequency is
increasing, these costs based on mass and volume are still sub-
stantial and prohibitive. Offering end-to-end omics capabilities
on orbit that are grounded in the concept of ‘‘cloud labs’’ will
be a paradigm shift for space research and science. Cloud
labs are essentially a virtual lab bench that allow the scientist
to control the wet-lab experiment virtually and execute it
remotely via an orchestra of automated robotic systems.138
Presently on the ISS and likely in the foreseeable future, several
key operational constraints limit rapid, repeatable research in
orbit: (1) limited human-tended time for executing experimental
protocols, (2) variability in the on-orbit operator’s scientiﬁc and
technical experience and expertise, (3) a large distance between
the principal investigator (PI) and the scientiﬁc payload, and (4)
inability to rapidly iterate on experimental protocols in real-
time. A cloud lab in space will enable the PI to (1) control the
experiment via the virtual lab bench, (2) conduct high-quality sci-
ence by eliminating a variety of confounding variables that are
introduced by returning samples to the ground for processing,
and (3) iterate on the scientiﬁc protocol based on real-time ob-
servations of data. Furthermore, on-orbit edge processing and
cloud-computing capabilities will accelerate data analysis
whereby processed results can be returned to the PI via a secure
downlink from the space station. Addition of such capabilities
will eliminate the need for large data downloads—a practice
that is slow, costly, and requires extremely high bandwidths.
While an upfront investment of capital is required for a state-
of-the-art orbital lab, a high return on investment can be ex-
pected. Improved on-orbit capabilities that are easier to access
and operate will generate greater interest in space-based
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
9
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

research investigations, which in turn will increase the demand to
leverage spaceﬂight as an extreme environment for research—
for example, the general adaptability of the human body, which
may result in the discovery of new molecular mechanisms. It is
expected that the reduction in costs to execute orbital science
will translate into lower prices for the researcher, thereby gener-
ating even greater interest in space. Taken together, these devel-
opments will drive a feedforward loop toward greater insights for
extending humanity’s footprint in space and improving life on the
ground.
Even with rapid advances in genomics and spaceﬂight technol-
ogy, experimentation in space will remain costly and time-
consumingintheforeseeablefuture.Thus,carefuldesignofexper-
iments is crucial. One factor that may alleviate the risk of these
experiments is in silico modeling. Perturbations on transcription
and gene expression can be modeled using ML algorithms to
test hypotheses prior to launching an experiment into space.139
Adapting these models to be more amenable to the environmental
factors of spaceﬂight can help use limited spaceﬂight resources
more efﬁciently. Additionally, to aid with experimental design, a
speciﬁcSRTmethodshouldbeselectedbeforeexperimentlaunch
to implement its optimized tissue preservation protocol, and the
development status of available computational tools should be
rigorously assessed to understand the expected analysis types
and data resolutions available. Given the rapid advancements in
SRT analysis, ideal tools and capabilities will grow quickly over
time. This sector will continue to push for more state-of-the-art
knowledge and state-of-the-art technology never attempted
before to develop innovative approaches for improving life sci-
ences research in space. It is also a high-risk, high-reward sector,
where projects tend to be expensive to fund and maintain but have
the potential tounlockdiscoveriesessential forhumanstobecome
a multi-planetary species. Through joint collaborations and part-
nerships and by building on previous milestones, resources, and
tools that have been established for spaceﬂight, we can continue
to rapidly advance our in-ﬂight genomics capabilities.
Results that emerge from scRNA-seq and SRT experiments
conducted in spaceﬂight are expected to increase our under-
standing of life in space, genetic control of fundamental pro-
cesses that are altered by spaceﬂight, and genomic control
mechanisms in cellular biology. Research groups and scientists
in the ﬁeld of space biosciences will continue to generate robust
multi-omic proﬁles of both in vitro and in vivo biospecimens
available from previous missions and biospecimen samples re-
turned from future missions. The quality of these data will in-
crease as better preservation protocols and innovative orbital
lab solutions are implemented. The results will allow us to
pinpoint cell-type-speciﬁc and locational disturbances in gene
expression and will facilitate the development of countermea-
sures against spaceﬂight-associated dysregulation and disease.
This goal is also in line with current international collaborative ef-
forts to expand our presence in LEO (low Earth orbit), return to
the moon, and progress forward to Mars.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
H.C., P.M., D.B., R.H., N.J.S., J.B., and S.G. are members of the ESA Space
Omics Topical Team, funded by the ESA grant/contract 4000131202/20/NL/
PG/pt ‘‘Space Omics: Towards an integrated ESA/NASA – omics database
for spaceﬂight and ground facilities experiments’’ awarded to R.H., which
was the main funding source for this work. H.C. is also supported by the Ho-
rizon Centre for Doctoral Training at the University of Nottingham (UKRI grant
no. EP/S023305/1). S.G. is supported by the Swedish Research Council VR
grant 2020-04864. E.G.O. is supported through NASA Postdoctoral Fellow-
ship 80NSSC21K0316. We thank Lindsay A. Rutter, Masafumi Muratani, the
ISSOP, and the ESA Space Omics Topical Team for fruitful discussions. We
would also like to thank Sarah Castro-Wallace for the personal communication
on current ISS research.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, E.G.O., S.D., H.C., P.M., R.K., R.T.S., J.B., and S.G.; inves-
tigation, E.G.O., S.D., H.C., P.M., Z.A., S.F., R.K., D.B., R.T.S., J.P., D.C.,
J.M.G., S.V.C., C.E.M., J.B., and S.G.; writing – original draft, E.G.O., S.D.,
H.C., P.M., Z.A., S.F., R.K., R.T.S., J.B., and S.G.; writing – review & editing,
all authors; visualization, E.G.O., H.C., and P.M.; supervision, S.G.; funding
acquisition, J.M.G., S.V.C., C.E.M., R.H., N.J.S., and S.G.
DECLARATIONS OF INTERESTS
C.E.M. is a co-Founder of Biotia and Onegevity Health. D.B. is the CSO at yuri
and a co-founder at Poppy Health. S.G. is a scientiﬁc advisor to 10X Genomics
Inc., which holds IP rights to the ST technology and holds stock options.
REFERENCES
1. Hasin, Y., Seldin, M., and Lusis, A. (2017). Multi-omics approaches to
disease. Genome Biol. 18, 83. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-017-
1215-1.
2. Manzoni, C., Kia, D.A., Vandrovcova, J., Hardy, J., Wood, N.W., Lewis,
P.A., and Ferrari, R. (2018). Genome, transcriptome and proteome: the
rise of omics data and their integration in biomedical sciences. Brief. Bio-
inform. 19, 286–302. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbw114.
3. Mathe´ , E., Hays, J., Stover, D., and Chen, J. (2018). The omics revolution
continues: the Maturation of high-throughput biological data sources.
Yearb. Med. Inform. 27, 211–222. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-
1667085.
4. Lu, M., and Zhan, X. (2018). The crucial role of multiomic approach in
cancer research and clinically relevant outcomes. EPMA J. 9, 77–102.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13167-018-0128-8.
5. Vlaanderen, J., Moore, L.E., Smith, M.T., Lan, Q., Zhang, L., Skibola,
C.F., Rothman, N., and Vermeulen, R. (2010). Application of OMICS tech-
nologies in occupational and environmental health research; current sta-
tus and projections. Occup. Environ. Med. 67, 136–143. https://doi.org/
10.1136/oem.2008.042788.
6. Yang, J., Yan, Y., and Zhong, W. (2020). Application of omics technology
to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. MedComm 2, 381–401. https://doi.
org/10.1002/mco2.90.
7. Berrios, D.C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S., and Costes, S. (2021).
NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics data. Nu-
cleic
Acids
Res.
49,
D1515–D1522.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkaa887.
8. Globus, R., Cadena, S., and Galazka, J. (2015). Rodent Research-1 (RR1)
National Lab Validation Flight: Mouse Liver Transcriptomic, Proteomic,
and Epigenomic Data. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/K5C1-
JD05.
9. Globus, R., Galazka, J.M., Marcu, O., Gebre, S.G., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-
Butler, A.M., Fogle, H.W., Bense, H., Chakravarty, K., Chen, R.B., et al.
(2015). Rodent Research-1 (RR1) NASA Validation Flight: Mouse Liver
Transcriptomic, Proteomic, and Epigenomic Data. NASA GeneLab.
https://doi.org/10.26030/JQ04-0N51.
10. da Silveira, W.A., Fazelinia, H., Rosenthal, S.B., Laiakis, E.C., Kim, M.S.,
Meydan, C., Kidane, Y., Rathi, K.S., Smith, S.M., Stear, B., et al. (2020).
10
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

Comprehensive multi-omics analysis reveals mitochondrial stress as a
central biological Hub for spaceﬂight impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201.e20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002.
11. Cahill, T., Cope, H., Bass, J.J., Overbey, E.G., Gilbert, R., da Silveira,
W.A., Paul, A.M., Mishra, T., Herranz, R., Reinsch, S.S., et al. (2021).
Mammalian and Invertebrate models as Complementary tools for gaining
Mechanistic insight on muscle responses to spaceﬂight. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
22, 9470. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22179470.
12. Fujita, S.-I., Rutter, L., Ong, Q., and Muratani, M. (2020). Integrated RNA-
seq analysis Indicates Asynchrony in Clock genes between tissues under
spaceﬂight. Life 10, 196. https://doi.org/10.3390/life10090196.
13. Malkani, S., Chin, C.R., Cekanaviciute, E., Mortreux, M., Okinula, H.,
Tarbier, M., Schreurs, A.S., Shirazi-Fard, Y., Tahimic, C.G., Rodriguez,
D.N., et al. (2020). Circulating miRNA spaceﬂight Signature reveals tar-
gets for countermeasure development. Cell Rep. 33, 108448. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108448.
14. Chen, G., Ning, B., and Shi, T. (2019). Single-cell RNA-seq technologies
and related computational data analysis. Front. Genet. 10, 317. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2019.00317.
15. Asp, M., Bergenstra˚ hle, J., and Lundeberg, J. (2020). Spatially resolved
transcriptomes-next generation tools for tissue exploration. Bioessays
42, e1900221. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201900221.
16. Aizarani, N., Saviano, A., Sagar, Mailly, L., Durand, S., Herman, J.S., Pes-
saux, P., Baumert, T.F., and Grun, D. (2019). A human liver cell atlas re-
veals heterogeneity and epithelial progenitors. Nature 572, 199–204.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1373-2.
17. Montoro, D.T., Haber, A.L., Biton, M., Vinarsky, V., Lin, B., Birket, S.E.,
Yuan, F., Chen, S., Leung, H.M., Villoria, J., et al. (2018). A revised airway
epithelial hierarchy includes CFTR-expressing ionocytes. Nature 560,
319–324. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0393-7.
18. Parikh, K., Antanaviciute, A., Fawkner-Corbett, D., Jagielowicz, M., Auli-
cino, A., Lagerholm, C., Davis, S., Kinchen, J., Chen, H.H., Alham, N.K.,
et al. (2019). Colonic epithelial cell diversity in health and inﬂammatory
bowel disease. Nature 567, 49–55. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
019-0992-y.
19. Park, J., Shrestha, R., Qiu, C., Kondo, A., Huang, S., Werth, M., Li, M.,
Barasch, J., and Susztak, K. (2018). Single-cell transcriptomics of the
mouse kidney reveals potential cellular targets of kidney disease. Sci-
ence 360, 758–763. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aar2131.
20. Trapnell, C. (2015). Deﬁning cell types and states with single-cell
genomics. Genome Res. 25, 1491–1498. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.
190595.115.
21. Wilbrey-Clark, A., Roberts, K., and Teichmann, S.A. (2020). Cell Atlas
technologies and insights into tissue architecture. Biochem. J. 477,
1427–1442. https://doi.org/10.1042/bcj20190341.
22. Overbey, E.G., da Silveira, W.A., Stanbouly, S., Nishiyama, N.C., Roque-
Torres, G.D., Pecaut, M.J., Zawieja, D.C., Wang, C., Willey, J.S., Delp,
M.D., et al. (2019). Spaceﬂight inﬂuences gene expression, photore-
ceptor integrity, and oxidative stress-related damage in the murine
retina. Sci. Rep. 9, 13304. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-49453-x.
23. Akiyama, T., Horie, K., Hinoi, E., Hiraiwa, M., Kato, A., Maekawa, Y., Ta-
kahashi, A., and Furukawa, S. (2020). How does spaceﬂight affect the ac-
quired immune system? NPJ Microgravity 6, 14. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41526-020-0104-1.
24. Baqai, F.P., Gridley, D.S., Slater, J.M., Luo-Owen, X., Stodieck, L.S., Fer-
guson, V., Chapes, S.K., and Pecaut, M.J. (2009). Effects of spaceﬂight
on innate immune function and antioxidant gene expression. J. Appl.
Physiol. 106, 1935–1942. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.91361.
2008.
25. Crucian, B.E., Chouker, A., Simpson, R.J., Mehta, S., Marshall, G., Smith,
S.M., Zwart, S.R., Heer, M., Ponomarev, S., Whitmire, A., et al. (2018).
Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight: potential countermea-
sures for Deep space exploration missions. Front. Immunol. 9, 1437.
https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2018.01437.
26. Shum, E.Y., Walczak, E.M., Chang, C., and Christina Fan, H. (2019).
Quantitation
of
mRNA
transcripts
and
proteins
using
the
BD
RhapsodyTM single-cell analysis system. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 1129,
63–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-6037-4_5.
27. Zheng, G.X.Y., Terry, J.M., Belgrader, P., Ryvkin, P., Bent, Z.W., Wilson,
R., Ziraldo, S.B., Wheeler, T.D., McDermott, G.P., Zhu, J., et al. (2017).
Massively parallel digital transcriptional proﬁling of single cells. Nat.
Commun. 8, 14049. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14049.
28. Galazka, J.M., Juran, C., Cekanaviciute, E., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler,
A.M., Boyko, V., Stodieck, L., Roberts, M., Costes, S.V., Gebre, S.G., and
Ferguson, V. (2021). Single Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling of Spleens from
Mice Flown on Rodent Research Reference Mission-2 (RRRM-2). NASA
GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/7P34-NF10.
29. Galazka, J.M., et al. (2021). Single Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling of Periph-
eral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) from Mice Flown on Rodent
Research Reference Mission-2 (RRRM-2). NASA GeneLab. https://doi.
org/10.26030/0R91-9V15.
30. Galazka, J.M., Juran, C., Cekanaviciute, E., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler,
A.M., Boyko, V., Stodieck, L., Roberts, M., Costes, S.V., Gebre, S.G., and
Ferguson, V. (2021). Single Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling of Humerus
Bone Marrow from Mice Flown on Rodent Research Reference
Mission-2 (RRRM-2). NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/KKF4-
P733.
31. Galazka, J.M., Juran, C., Cekanaviciute, E., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler,
A.M., Boyko, V., Stodieck, L., Roberts, M., Costes, S.V., Gebre, S.G., and
Ferguson, V. (2021). Single Cell Transcriptional Proﬁling of Femur Bone
Marrow from Mice Flown on Rodent Research Reference Mission-2
(RRRM-2). NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/R127-MC55.
32. Garrett-Bakelman, F.E., Darshi, M., Green, S.J., Gur, R.C., Lin, L., Ma-
cias, B.R., McKenna, M.J., Meydan, C., Mishra, T., Nasrini, J., et al.
(2019). The NASA Twins Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-
long human spaceﬂight. Science 364, eaau8650. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aau8650.
33. Gertz, M.L., Chin, C.R., Tomoiaga, D., MacKay, M., Chang, C., Butler, D.,
Afshinnekoo, E., Bezdan, D., Schmidt, M.A., Mozsary, C., et al. (2020).
Multi-omic, single-cell, and Biochemical proﬁles of astronauts guide
Pharmacological strategies for returning to gravity. Cell Rep. 33,
108429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108429.
34. Liao, J., Lu, X., Shao, X., Zhu, L., and Fan, X. (2021). Uncovering an Or-
gan’s molecular architecture at single-cell resolution by spatially
resolved transcriptomics. Trends Biotechnol. 39, 43–58. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.05.006.
35. Maniatis, S., Petrescu, J., and Phatnani, H. (2021). Spatially resolved
transcriptomics and its applications in cancer. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.
66, 70–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2020.12.002.
36. Berglund, E., Saarenpaa, S., Jemt, A., Gruselius, J., Larsson, L., Bergen-
strahle, L., Lundeberg, J., and Giacomello, S. (2020). Automation of
Spatial Transcriptomics library preparation to enable rapid and robust in-
sights into spatial organization of tissues. BMC Genom. 21, 298. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-6631-z.
37. Butler, D., Mozsary, C., Meydan, C., Foox, J., Rosiene, J., Shaiber, A.,
Danko, D., Afshinnekoo, E., MacKay, M., Sedlazeck, F.J., et al. (2021).
Shotgun transcriptome, spatial omics, and isothermal proﬁling of
SARS-CoV-2 infection reveals unique host responses, viral diversiﬁca-
tion, and drug interactions. Nat. Commun. 12, 1660. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-021-21361-7.
38. Giacomello, S. (2021). A new era for plant science: spatial single-cell
transcriptomics. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 60, 102041. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pbi.2021.102041.
39. Park, J., Foox, J., Hether, T., Danko, D.C., Warren, S., Kim, Y., Reeves, J.,
Butler, D.J., Mozsary, C., Rosiene, J., et al. (2022). System-wide
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
11
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

transcriptome damage and tissue identity loss in COVID-19 patients. Cell
Rep Med 3, 100522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2022.100522.
40. Ke, R., Mignardi, M., Pacureanu, A., Svedlund, J., Botling, J., Wahlby, C.,
and Nilsson, M. (2013). In situ sequencing for RNA analysis in preserved
tissue and cells. Nat. Methods 10, 857–860. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nmeth.2563.
41. Lubeck, E., Coskun, A.F., Zhiyentayev, T., Ahmad, M., and Cai, L. (2014).
Single-cell in situ RNA proﬁling by sequential hybridization. Nat. Methods
11, 360–361. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2892.
42. Junker, J., Noel, E., Guryev, V., Peterson, K., Shah, G., Huisken, J.,
McMahon, A., Berezikov, E., Bakkers, J., and van Oudenaarden, A.
(2014). Genome-wide RNA Tomography in the zebraﬁsh embryo. Cell
159, 662–675. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.038.
43. Lovatt, D., Ruble, B.K., Lee, J., Dueck, H., Kim, T.K., Fisher, S., Francis,
C., Spaethling, J.M., Wolf, J.A., Grady, M.S., et al. (2014). Transcriptome
in vivo analysis (TIVA) of spatially deﬁned single cells in live tissue. Nat.
Methods 11, 190–196. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2804.
44. Lee, J.H., Daugharthy, E.R., Scheiman, J., Kalhor, R., Ferrante, T.C.,
Terry, R., Turczyk, B.M., Yang, J.L., Lee, H.S., Aach, J., et al. (2015). Fluo-
rescent in situ sequencing (FISSEQ) of RNA for gene expression proﬁling
in intact cells and tissues. Nat. Protoc. 10, 442–458. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nprot.2014.191.
45. Mofﬁtt, J.R., Hao, J., Wang, G., Chen, K.H., Babcock, H.P., and Zhuang,
X. (2016). High-throughput single-cell gene-expression proﬁling with
multiplexed error-robust ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 113, 11046–11051. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1612826113.
46. Nichterwitz, S., Chen, G., Aguila Benitez, J., Yilmaz, M., Storvall, H., Cao,
M.,
Sandberg,
R.,
Deng,
Q.,
and
Hedlund,
E.
(2016).
Laser
capture microscopy coupled with Smart-seq2 for precise spatial
transcriptomic proﬁling. Nat. Commun. 7, 12139. https://doi.org/10.
1038/ncomms12139.
47. Sta˚ hl, P.L., Salmen, F., Vickovic, S., Lundmark, A., Navarro, J.F., Mag-
nusson, J., Giacomello, S., Asp, M., Westholm, J.O., Huss, M., et al.
(2016). Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections
by spatial transcriptomics. Science 353, 78–82. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aaf2403.
48. Chen, J., Suo, S., Tam, P.P., Han, J.D.J., Peng, G., and Jing, N. (2017).
Spatial transcriptomic analysis of cryosectioned tissue samples with
Geo-seq. Nat. Protoc. 12, 566–580. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.
2017.003.
49. Wang, X., Allen, W.E., Wright, M.A., Sylwestrak, E.L., Samusik, N., Ve-
suna, S., Evans, K., Liu, C., Ramakrishnan, C., Liu, J., et al. (2018).
Three-dimensional intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell transcriptional
states.
Science
361,
eaat5691.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aat5691.
50. Vickovic, S., Eraslan, G., Salmen, F., Klughammer, J., Stenbeck, L.,
Schapiro, D., Aijo, T., Bonneau, R., Bergenstrahle, L., Navarro, J.F.,
et al. (2019). High-deﬁnition spatial transcriptomics for in situ tissue
proﬁling. Nat. Methods 16, 987–990. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-
019-0548-y.
51. Liu, Y., Yang, M., Deng, Y., Su, G., Enninful, A., Guo, C.C., Tebaldi, T.,
Zhang, D., Kim, D., Bai, Z., et al. (2020). High-spatial-resolution multi-
omics sequencing via Deterministic barcoding in tissue. Cell 183,
1665–1681.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.026.
52. Zollinger, D.R., Lingle, S.E., Sorg, K., Beechem, J.M., and Merritt, C.R.
(2020). GeoMxTM RNA assay: high Multiplex, digital, spatial analysis of
RNA in FFPE tissue. Methods Mol. Biol. 2148, 331–345. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-1-0716-0623-0_21.
53. Stickels, R.R., Murray, E., Kumar, P., Li, J., Marshall, J.L., Di Bella, D.J.,
Arlotta, P., Macosko, E.Z., and Chen, F. (2021). Highly sensitive spatial
transcriptomics at near-cellular resolution with Slide-seqV2. Nat. Bio-
technol. 39, 313–319. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0739-1.
54. Xia, K., Sun, H.-X., Li, J., Li, J., Zhao, Y., Chen, R., Liu, G., Chen, Z., Yin,
R., Hao, S., et al. (2021). Single-cell Stereo-seq enables cell type-speciﬁc
spatial transcriptome characterization in Arabidopsis leaves. Preprint at
bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.20.465066.
55. Groiss, S., Pabst, D., Faber, C., Meier, A., Bogdoll, A., Unger, C., Nilges,
B., Strauss, S., Foderl-Hobenreich, E., Hardt, M., et al. (2021). Highly
resolved spatial transcriptomics for detection of rare events in cells. Pre-
print at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.11.463936.
56. He, S., Bhatt, R., Brown, C., Brown, E.A., Buhr, D.L., Chantranuvatana,
K., Danaher, P., Dunaway, D., Garrison, R.G., Geiss, G., et al. (2021).
High-plex multiomic analysis in FFPE at Subcellular level by spatial mo-
lecular imaging. Preprint at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.11.03.
467020.
57. Sidova, M., Tomankova, S., Abaffy, P., Kubista, M., and Sindelka, R.
(2015). Effects of post-mortem and physical degradation on RNA integ-
rity and quality. Biomol Detect Quantif 5, 3–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bdq.2015.08.002.
58. Garneau, N.L., Wilusz, J., and Wilusz, C.J. (2007). The highways and by-
ways of mRNA decay. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 113–126. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrm2104.
59. Yang, E., van Nimwegen, E., Zavolan, M., Rajewsky, N., Schroeder, M.,
Magnasco, M., and Darnell, J.E. (2003). Decay rates of human mRNAs:
correlation with functional characteristics and sequence attributes.
Genome Res. 13, 1863–1872. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.1272403.
60. Eraslan, G., Drokhlyansky, E., Anand, S., Fiskin, E., Subramanian, A.,
Slyper, M., Wang, J., Van Wittenberghe, N., Rouhana, J.M., Waldman,
J., et al. (2022). Single-nucleus cross-tissue molecular reference maps
toward understanding disease gene function. Science 376, eabl4290.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abl4290.
61. Koenitzer, J.R., Wu, H., Atkinson, J.J., Brody, S.L., and Humphreys, B.D.
(2020).
Single-nucleus
RNA-sequencing
proﬁling
of
mouse
lung.
Reduced dissociation bias and improved rare cell-type detection
compared with single-cell RNA sequencing. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol.
Biol. 63, 739–747. https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2020-0095ma.
62. Wu, H., Kirita, Y., Donnelly, E.L., and Humphreys, B.D. (2019). Advan-
tages of single-nucleus over single-cell RNA sequencing of adult kidney:
rare cell types and novel cell states revealed in Fibrosis. J. Am. Soc.
Nephrol. 30, 23–32. https://doi.org/10.1681/asn.2018090912.
63. Li, H., Janssens, J., De Waegeneer, M., Kolluru, S.S., Davie, K., Gardeux,
V., Saelens, W., David, F.P.A., Brbic, M., Spanier, K., and et al.. (2022).
Fly Cell Atlas: a single-nucleus transcriptomic atlas of the adult fruit ﬂy.
Science 375, eabk2432. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abk2432.
64. Galazka, J.M., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Charles, H., Boyko, V.,
Degoricija, L., Narang, S., Roberts, M., Stodieck, L., Gebre, S.G., and
Costes, S.V. (2021). Transcriptional Proﬁling of Livers from Mice Flown
on Rodent Research Reference Mission-1 (RRRM-1). NASA GeneLab.
https://doi.org/10.26030/k766-s627.
65. Smith, R., Cramer, M., Globus, R., and Galazka, J. (2017). Rodent
Research-3-CASIS: Mouse Liver Transcriptomic, Proteomic, and Epige-
nomic Data. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/9k6w-4c28.
66. Smith, R., Cramer, M., Globus, R., and Galazka, J. (2018). Rodent
Research-3-CASIS: Mouse Eye Transcriptomic and Proteomic Data.
NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/pys4-6t29.
67. Smith, R., Cramer, M., Globus, R., and Galazka, J. (2018). Rodent
Research-3-CASIS: Mouse Kidney Transcriptomic, Proteomic, and Epi-
genomic Data. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/q8vt-7p92.
68. Smith, R., Cramer, M., Globus, R., and Galazka, J. (2018). Rodent
Research-3-CASIS: Mouse Retina Transcriptomic Data. NASA GeneLab.
https://doi.org/10.26030/pev7-5695.
69. Choi, S.Y., Saravia-Butler, A., Shirazi-Fard, Y., Leveson-Gower, D., Sto-
dieck, L.S., Cadena, S.M., Beegle, J., Solis, S., Ronca, A., and Globus,
R.K. (2020). Validation of a new rodent experimental system to
12
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

investigate Consequences of long duration space Habitation. Sci. Rep.
10, 2336. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-58898-4.
70. Lai Polo, S.-H., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Boyko, V., Dinh, M.T., Chen, Y.C.,
Fogle, H., Reinsch, S.S., Ray, S., Chakravarty, K., Marcu, O., et al.
(2020).
RNAseq
analysis
of
rodent
spaceﬂight
experiments
is
confounded by sample collection techniques. iScience 23, 101733.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101733.
71. Pimpalwar, N., Czuba, T., Smith, M.L., Nilsson, J., Gidlof, O., and Smith,
J.G. (2020). Methods for isolation and transcriptional proﬁling of individ-
ual cells from the human heart. Heliyon 6, e05810. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.heliyon.2020.e05810.
72. Kruse, C.P.S., Basu, P., Luesse, D.R., and Wyatt, S.E. (2017). Transcrip-
tome and proteome responses in RNAlater preserved tissue of Arabidop-
sis thaliana. PLoS One 12, e0175943. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0175943.
73. Andersen, T., Aubry, C., Benschop, T., Crippa, G., De Parolis, M.N., Que-
merais, S., Renz, M., Ryckebosch, O., Schawer, J., Seidel, A., et al.
(2005). A 180 C Cryogenic Freezer for the International Space Station.
SAE. https://doi.org/10.4271/2005-01-2903.
74. Saravia-Butler, A.M., Galazka, J., Torres, M.L., Chen, Y.-C., Choi, S.,
Klotz, R., Perreau, S., Gower, D.L., Shirazi, Y., Polo, S.-H.L., et al.
(2020). Transcriptional analysis of soleus from mice preserved with the
Rapid Freeze hardware. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/
e1ea-gx05.
75. Saravia-Butler, A.M., Galazka, J., Torres, M.L., Chen, Y.-C., Choi, S.,
Klotz, R., Perreau, S., Gower, D.L., Shirazi, Y., Polo, S.-H.L., et al.
(2020). Transcriptional analysis of livers from mice preserved with the
Rapid Freeze hardware. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/
ya8v-7043.
76. Saravia-Butler, A.M., Galazka, J., Torres, M.L., Chen, Y.-C., Choi, S.,
Klotz, R., Perreau, S., Gower, D.L., Shirazi, Y., Polo, S.-H.L., et al.
(2020). Transcriptional analysis of spleens from mice preserved with
the Rapid Freeze hardware. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/
dty4-1b66.
77. Choi, S., Ray, H.E., Lai, S.-H., Alwood, J.S., and Globus, R.K. (2016).
Preservation of multiple mammalian tissues to Maximize science return
from ground based and spaceﬂight experiments. PLoS One 11,
e0167391. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0167391.
78. Gupta, V., Holets-Bondar, L., Roby, K.F., Enders, G., and Tash, J.S.
(2015). A tissue retrieval and postharvest processing regimen for rodent
reproductive tissues compatible with long-term storage on the interna-
tional space station and postﬂight biospecimen sharing program. Bio-
Med Res. Int. 2015, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/475935.
79. Herranz, R., Vandenbrink, J.P., Villacampa, A., Manzano, A., Poehlman,
W.L., Feltus, F.A., Kiss, J.Z., and Medina, F.J. (2019). RNAseq analysis of
the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to fractional gravity under blue-light
stimulation during spaceﬂight. Front. Plant Sci. 10, 1529. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpls.2019.01529.
80. Manzano, A., Villacampa, A., Saez-Vasquez, J., Kiss, J.Z., Medina, F.J.,
and Herranz, R. (2020). The importance of Earth reference controls in
spaceﬂight -omics research: characterization of nucleolin mutants from
the Seedling Growth experiments. iScience 23, 101686. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.isci.2020.101686.
81. Paul, A.-L., Levine, H.G., McLamb, W., Norwood, K.L., Reed, D., Stutte,
G.W., William Wells, H., and Ferl, R.J. (2005). Plant molecular biology in
the space station era: utilization of KSC ﬁxation tubes with RNAlater.
Acta Astronaut. 56, 623–628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2004.
10.001.
82. Paul, A.-L., Zupanska, A.K., Ostrow, D.T., Zhang, Y., Sun, Y., Li, J.L.,
Shanker, S., Farmerie, W.G., Amalﬁtano, C.E., and Ferl, R.J. (2012).
Spaceﬂight transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel environment.
Astrobiology 12, 40–56. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2011.0696.
83. Schultz, E.R., Kelley, K.L., Paul, A., and Ferl, R.J. (2013). A method for
preparing spaceﬂight RNAlater-ﬁxed Arabidopsis thaliana (Brassica-
ceae) tissue for scanning electron microscopy. Appl. Plant Sci. 1,
1300034. https://doi.org/10.3732/apps.1300034.
84. Vandenbrink, J.P., Herranz, R., Poehlman, W.L., Alex Feltus, F., Villa-
campa, A., Ciska, M., Javier Medina, F., and Kiss, J.Z. (2019). RNA-
seq analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after exposure to blue-
light phototropic stimuli in microgravity. Am. J. Bot. 106, 1466–1476.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajb2.1384.
85. Villacampa, A., Ciska, M., Manzano, A., Vandenbrink, J.P., Kiss, J.Z.,
Herranz, R., and Medina, F.J. (2021). From spaceﬂight to Mars g-levels:
Adaptive response of A. thaliana seedlings in a reduced gravity environ-
ment is enhanced by red-light photostimulation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 899.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22020899.
86. Wnorowski, A., Sharma, A., Chen, H., Wu, H., Shao, N.Y., Sayed, N., Liu,
C., Countryman, S., Stodieck, L.S., Rubins, K.H., et al. (2019). Effects of
spaceﬂight on human induced Pluripotent stem cell-derived Cardiomyo-
cyte structure and function. Stem Cell Rep. 13, 960–969. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.stemcr.2019.10.006.
87. Balsamo, M., Barravecchia, I., Mariotti, S., Merenda, A., De Cesari, C.,
Vukich, M., and Angeloni, D. (2014). Molecular and cellular characteriza-
tion of space ﬂight effects on Microvascular Endothelial cell function –
PreparatoryWork for the SFEF project. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 26,
351–363. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12217-014-9399-4.
88. Cockell, C.S., Santomartino, R., Finster, K., Waajen, A.C., Eades, L.J.,
Moeller, R., Rettberg, P., Fuchs, F.M., Van Houdt, R., Leys, N., et al.
(2020). Space station biomining experiment demonstrates rare earth
element extraction in microgravity and Mars gravity. Nat. Commun. 11,
5523. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19276-w.
89. Zamarioli, A., Campbell, Z.R., Maupin, K.A., Childress, P.J., Ximenez,
J.P.B., Adam, G., Chakraborty, N., Gautam, A., Hammamieh, R., and Ka-
cena, M.A. (2021). Analysis of the effects of spaceﬂight and local admin-
istration of thrombopoietin to a femoral defect injury on distal skeletal
sites. NPJ Microgravity 7, 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-
00140-0.
90. Huang, P., Russell, A.L., Lefavor, R., Durand, N.C., James, E., Harvey, L.,
Zhang, C., Countryman, S., Stodieck, L., and Zubair, A.C. (2020). Feasi-
bility, potency, and safety of growing human mesenchymal stem cells in
space for clinical application. NPJ Microgravity 6, 16. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41526-020-0106-z.
91. Hong, X., Ratri, A., Choi, S.Y., Tash, J.S., Ronca, A.E., Alwood, J.S., and
Christenson, L.K. (2021). Effects of spaceﬂight aboard the International
Space Station on mouse estrous cycle and ovarian gene expression.
NPJ Microgravity 7, 11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00139-7.
92. Galazka, J.M., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Fogle, H.W., Bense,
N., Boyko, V., Dinh, M.T., Costes, S.V., and Gebre, S.G. (2019). Tran-
scriptional Analysis of Lung from Mice Flown on the RR-6 Mission.
NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/d56m-7e45.
93. Galazka, J.M., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Fogle, H.W., Bense,
N., Chen, Y.-C., Narang, S., Dinh, M.T., Costes, S.V., Gebre, S.G.,
et al. (2019). Effect of spaceﬂight on liver from mice ﬂown on the ISS
for 33 days: Transcriptional analysis. NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/
10.26030/fmkc-8h31.
94. Galazka, J.M., Degoricija, L., Polo, S.-H.L., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Boyko,
V., Dinh, M.T., Houseman, C., Costes, S.V., and Gebre, S.G. (2021). Tran-
scriptional proﬁling of thymus from mice ﬂown on the RR-9 Mission.
NASA GeneLab. https://doi.org/10.26030/5mv4-fe66.
95. Castro-Wallace, S.L., Chiu, C.Y., John, K.K., Stahl, S.E., Rubins, K.H.,
McIntyre, A.B.R., Dworkin, J.P., Lupisella, M.L., Smith, D.J., Botkin,
D.J., et al. (2017). Nanopore DNA sequencing and genome assembly
on the International Space Station. Sci. Rep. 7, 18022.
96. Burton, A.S., Stahl, S.E., John, K.K., Jain, M., Juul, S., Turner, D.J., Har-
rington, E.D., Stoddart, D., Paten, B., Akeson, M., and Castro-Wallace,
S.L. (2020). Off earth identiﬁcation of bacterial populations using 16S
rDNA nanopore sequencing. Genes 11, 76. https://doi.org/10.3390/
genes11010076.
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
13
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

97. Stahl-Rommel, S., Jain, M., Nguyen, H.N., Arnold, R.R., Aunon-Chan-
cellor, S.M., Sharp, G.M., Castro, C.L., John, K.K., Juul, S., Turner,
D.J., et al. (2021). Real-time culture-Independent microbial proﬁling on-
board the international space station using Nanopore sequencing. Genes
12, 106. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12010106.
98. Stahl-Rommel, S., Li, D., Sung, M., Li, R., Vijayakumar, A., Atabay, K.D.,
Bushkin, G.G., Castro, C.L., Foley, K.D., Copeland, D.S., et al. (2021). A
CRISPR-based assay for the study of eukaryotic DNA repair onboard the
International Space Station. PLoS One 16, e0253403. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0253403.
99. Checinska Sielaff, A., Urbaniak, C., Mohan, G.B.M., Stepanov, V.G.,
Tran, Q., Wood, J.M., Minich, J., McDonald, D., Mayer, T., Knight, R.,
et al. (2019). Characterization of the total and viable bacterial and fungal
communities associated with the International Space Station surfaces.
Microbiome 7, 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x.
100. Spivey, R., Jeter, L., and Vonk, C. (2007). The microgravity science glove-
box (MSG), a resource for gravity-dependent phenomena research on
the international space station (ISS). In 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit (American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics).
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2007-546.
101. Thiel, C.S., Tauber, S., Seebacher, C., Schropp, M., Uhl, R., Lauber, B.,
Polzer, J., Neelam, S., Zhang, Y., and Ullrich, O. (2019). Real-time 3D
high-resolution microscopy of human cells on the international space
station. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 2033. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20082033.
102. Jemt, A., Salmen, F., Lundmark, A., Mollbrink, A., Fernandez Navarro, J.,
Stahl, P.L., Yucel-Lindberg, T., and Lundeberg, J. (2016). An automated
approach to prepare tissue-derived spatially barcoded RNA-sequencing
libraries. Sci. Rep. 6, 37137. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep37137.
103. Stenbeck, L., Taborsak-Lines, F., and Giacomello, S. (2022). Enabling
automated and reproducible spatially resolved transcriptomics at scale.
Heliyon 8, e09651. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e09651.
104. Overbey, E.G., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Zhang, Z., Rathi, K.S., Fogle, H., da
Silveira, W.A., Barker, R.J., Bass, J.J., Beheshti, A., Berrios, D.C., et al.
(2021). NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline: standardized pro-
cessing of short-read RNA-seq data. iScience 24, 102361. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361.
105. Conesa, A., Madrigal, P., Tarazona, S., Gomez-Cabrero, D., Cervera, A.,
McPherson, A., Szczesniak, M.W., Gaffney, D.J., Elo, L.L., Zhang, X., and
Mortazavi, A. (2016). A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data anal-
ysis. Genome Biol. 17, 13. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0881-8.
106. La¨ hnemann, D., Koster, J., Szczurek, E., McCarthy, D.J., Hicks, S.C.,
Robinson, M.D., Vallejos, C.A., Campbell, K.R., Beerenwinkel, N., Mah-
fouz, A., et al. (2020). Eleven grand challenges in single-cell data science.
Genome Biol. 21, 31. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-1926-6.
107. Andrews, T.S., Kiselev, V.Y., McCarthy, D., and Hemberg, M. (2021).
Tutorial: guidelines for the computational analysis of single-cell RNA
sequencing data. Nat. Protoc. 16, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-
020-00409-w.
108. Luecken, M.D., and Theis, F.J. (2019). Current best practices in single-
cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8746. https://doi.
org/10.15252/msb.20188746.
109. Stuart, T., and Satija, R. (2019). Integrative single-cell analysis. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 20, 257–272. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-019-0093-7.
110. Hao, Y., Hao, S., Andersen-Nissen, E., Mauck, W.M., Zheng, S., Butler,
A., Lee, M.J., Wilk, A.J., Darby, C., Zager, M., et al. (2021). Integrated
analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell 184, 3573–3587.e29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.048.
111. Palla, G., Spitzer, H., Klein, M., Fischer, D., Schaar, A.C., Kuemmerle,
L.B., Rybakov, S., Ibarra, I.L., Holmberg, O., Virshup, I., et al. (2022).
Squidpy: a scalable framework for spatial omics analysis. Nat. Methods
19, 171–178. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01358-2.
112. Bergenstra˚ hle, J., Bergenstra˚ hle, L., and Lundeberg, J. (2020). SpatialC-
Pie: an R/Bioconductor package for spatial transcriptomics cluster
evaluation. BMC Bioinf. 21, 161. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-020-
3489-7.
113. Zhao, E., Stone, M.R., Ren, X., Guenthoer, J., Smythe, K.S., Pulliam, T.,
Williams, S.R., Uytingco, C.R., Taylor, S.E.B., Nghiem, P., et al. (2021).
Spatial transcriptomics at subspot resolution with BayesSpace. Nat. Bio-
technol. 39, 1375–1384. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-00935-2.
114. Friedrich, S., and Sonnhammer, E.L.L. (2020). Fusion transcript detection
using spatial transcriptomics. BMC Med. Genomics 13, 110. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12920-020-00738-5.
115. Ferna´ ndez Navarro, J., Lundeberg, J., and Sta˚ hl, P.L. (2019). ST viewer: a
tool for analysis and visualization of spatial transcriptomics datasets.
Bioinformatics 35, 1058–1060. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
bty714.
116. Cable, D.M., Murray, E., Zou, L.S., Goeva, A., Macosko, E.Z., Chen, F.,
and Irizarry, R.A. (2021). Robust decomposition of cell type mixtures in
spatial transcriptomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 517–526. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41587-021-00830-w.
117. Yuan, Y., and Bar-Joseph, Z. (2020). GCNG: graph convolutional net-
works for inferring gene interaction from spatial transcriptomics data.
Genome Biol. 21, 300. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02214-w.
118. Andersson, A., and Lundeberg, J. (2021). sepal: identifying transcript pro-
ﬁles with spatial patterns by diffusion-based modeling. Bioinformatics
37, 2644–2650. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab164.
119. Svensson, V., Teichmann, S.A., and Stegle, O. (2018). SpatialDE: identi-
ﬁcation of spatially variable genes. Nat. Methods 15, 343–346. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4636.
120. Xu, Y., and McCord, R.P. (2021). CoSTA: unsupervised convolutional
neural network learning for spatial transcriptomics analysis. BMC Bioinf.
22, 397. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-021-04314-1.
121. Levy-Jurgenson, A., Tekpli, X., and Yakhini, Z. (2021). Assessing hetero-
geneity in spatial data using the HTA index with applications to spatial
transcriptomics and imaging. Bioinformatics 37, 3796–3804. https://
doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btab569.
122. Li, Z., Song, T., Yong, J., and Kuang, R. (2021). Imputation of spatially-
resolved transcriptomes by graph-regularized tensor completion. PLoS
Comput.
Biol.
17,
e1008218.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1008218.
123. Bergenstra˚ hle, J., Larsson, L., and Lundeberg, J. (2020). Seamless inte-
gration of image and molecular analysis for spatial transcriptomics work-
ﬂows. BMC Genom. 21, 482. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-020-
06832-3.
124. Kleshchevnikov, V., Shmatko, A., Dann, E., Aivazidis, A., King, H.W., Li,
T., Elmentaite, R., Lomakin, A., Kedlian, V., Gayoso, A., et al. (2022).
Cell2location maps ﬁne-grained cell types in spatial transcriptomics.
Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 661–671. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-021-
01139-4.
125. Andersson, A., Bergenstrahle, J., Asp, M., Bergenstrahle, L., Jurek, A.,
Fernandez Navarro, J., and Lundeberg, J. (2020). Single-cell and spatial
transcriptomics enables probabilistic inference of cell type topography.
Commun Biol 3, 565. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01247-y.
126. Lohoff, T., Ghazanfar, S., Missarova, A., Koulena, N., Pierson, N., Grif-
ﬁths, J.A., Bardot, E.S., Eng, C.H.L., Tyser, R.C.V., Argelaguet, R.,
et al. (2022). Integration of spatial and single-cell transcriptomic data elu-
cidates mouse organogenesis. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 74–85. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41587-021-01006-2.
127. Hu, J., Schroeder, A., Coleman, K., Chen, C., Auerbach, B.J., and Li, M.
(2021). Statistical and machine learning methods for spatially resolved
transcriptomics with histology. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 19,
3829–3841. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2021.06.052.
128. Atta, L., and Fan, J. (2021). Computational challenges and opportunities
in spatially resolved transcriptomic data analysis. Nat. Commun. 12,
5283. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25557-9.
14
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS

129. Chakraborty, N., Schmitt, C.W., Honnold, C.L., Moyler, C., Butler, S., Na-
chabe, H., Gautam, A., and Hammamieh, R. (2020). Protocol improve-
ment for RNA extraction from Compromised frozen specimens gener-
ated
in
Austere
conditions:
a
Path
forward
to
transcriptomics-
Pathology systems integration. Front. Mol. Biosci. 7, 142. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fmolb.2020.00142.
130. van Loon, J.J.W.A., and BIOPACK, J.J.W.A. (2004). BIOPACK: the
ground controlled late access biological research facility. J. Gravit. Phys-
iol. 11, 57–65.
131. Bizet, F., Pereda-Loth, V., Chauvet, H., Gerard, J., Eche, B., Girousse, C.,
Courtade, M., Perbal, G., and Legue, V. (2018). Both gravistimulation
onset and removal trigger an increase of cytoplasmic free calcium in sta-
tocytes of roots grown in microgravity. Sci. Rep. 8, 11442. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-018-29788-7.
132. Shaka, S., Carpo, N., Tran, V., Cepeda, C., and Espinosa-Jeffrey, A.
(2021). Microgravity signiﬁcantly inﬂuences neural stem cells size and
numbers: Implications for long-term space missions. Stem Cells Res.
Dev. Ther. 7, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.24966/srdt-2060/100088.
133. Alonzo, M., El Khoury, R., Nagiah, N., Thakur, V., Chattopadhyay, M., and
Joddar, B. (2022). 3D biofabrication of a cardiac tissue construct for sus-
tained longevity and function. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14, 21800–
21813. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c23883.
134. Trevino, A.E., Muller, F., Andersen, J., Sundaram, L., Kathiria, A., Shcher-
bina, A., Farh, K., Chang, H.Y., Pașca, A.M., Kundaje, A., et al. (2021).
Chromatin and gene-regulatory dynamics of the developing human cere-
bral cortex at single-cell resolution. Cell 184, 5053–5069.e23. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.039.
135. Wang, K., Xiao, Z., Yan, Y., Ye, R., Hu, M., Bai, S., Sei, E., Qiao, Y., Chen,
H., Lim, B., et al. (2021). Simple oligonucleotide-based multiplexing of
single-cell
chromatin
accessibility.
Mol.
Cell
81,
4319–4332.e10.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.09.026.
136. Fan, R., Deng, Y., Bartosovic, M., Ma, S., Zhang, D., Liu, Y., Qin, X., Su,
G., Xu, M., Halene, S., et al. (2021). Spatial-ATAC-seq: spatially resolved
chromatin accessibility proﬁling of tissues at genome scale and cellular
level. Research Square. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-593462/v1.
137. Thornton, C.A., Mulqueen, R.M., Torkenczy, K.A., Nishida, A., Lowen-
stein, E.G., Fields, A.J., Steemers, F.J., Zhang, W., McConnell, H.L.,
Woltjer, R.L., et al. (2021). Spatially mapped single-cell chromatin acces-
sibility. Nat. Commun. 12, 1274. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-
21515-7.
138. Arnold, C. (2022). Cloud labs: where robots do the research. Nature 606,
612–613. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-01618-x.
139. Ji, Y., Lotfollahi, M., Wolf, F.A., and Theis, F.J. (2021). Machine learning
for perturbational single-cell omics. Cell Syst 12, 522–537. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cels.2021.05.016.
Cell Reports Methods 2, 100325, November 21, 2022
15
Perspective
ll
OPEN ACCESS
