RESEARCH ARTICLE
Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-025-07090-z
When considering methods of measuring position sense, 
there is currently no agreement over the preferred method 
of choice. This problem was recently addressed by Roach et 
al. (2023) who studied three commonly employed methods. 
These were two-arm matching, one-arm pointing and one-
arm repositioning. Somewhat unexpectedly, each method 
produced a significantly different outcome. This led to the 
question, do we have more than one position sense?
We have maintained a continuing interest in position 
sense over the years and, more recently, become aware that 
under conditions of weightlessness position sense is dis­
turbed (Young et al. 1984; Kenyon and Young 1986; Weber 
et al. 2020). It has led us to speculate about possible mecha­
nisms responsible for the disturbance (Weber and Proske 
2022; Proske and Weber 2023). In the light of the findings 
by Roach et al. (2023) we have decided to re-measure posi­
tion sense during changes in gravity with each of the three 
methods and to look for differences in outcomes. Here we 
were hoping to obtain new insight into the neural mecha­
nisms underlying the generation of position sense.
Arguably the most influential study of the effects of 
changes in gravity on position sense is that by Lackner and 
DiZio (1992). Position sense was measured, using a two-
arm position matching task, during the rises and falls in 
Introduction
The ability to accurately perceive the position of a body part 
without looking at it, human position sense, is one of the 
proprioceptive senses, “the senses within”. Proprioception 
includes the senses of position, movement, force, heavi­
ness, and balance (Proske and Gandevia 2012). Arguably, 
the sense of position is the most important of these, since it 
is believed to contribute to our self-awareness (Cole 1995) 
and it is an important contributor to the control of reach­
ing movements (Desmurget et al. 1995; Sarlegna and Sains­
burg, 2009).
Communicated by Bill Yates.
	
 Bernhard M. Weber
Bernhard.Weber@dlr.de
	
 Uwe Proske
Uwe.Proske@monash.edu
1	
German Aerospace Center, Institute of Robotics and 
Mechatronics, 82234 Wessling, Germany
2	
Department of Physiology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Vic 3800, Australia
Abstract
Under conditions of weightlessness human position sense appears to deteriorate. This was tested, employing three meth­
ods of measurement: two-arm matching, one-arm pointing and one-arm repositioning, carried out during parabolic flight. 
In hypergravity (1.8G), position sense errors in a matching task increased significantly from the value during horizontal 
flight (1G) of + 2.5° (± 3.8° SD), to + 3.5° (± 3.3°). For pointing, errors increased significantly from + 9.1° (± 4.4°) to 
+ 11.2° (± 4.4°). In microgravity (0G), matching errors fell significantly to + 0.35° (± 3.5°), while in pointing the fall was 
not significant. For repositioning, there were no significant changes in errors in either hypergravity or microgravity. It is 
proposed that the errors in matching and pointing are a consequence of the force of gravity acting at the elbow joint to 
alter the position signal coming from muscle and joint receptors. For repositioning, memory of the test angle was stored 
centrally, to be reproduced independently of any changes in gravity.
Keywords  Position sense · Proprioception · Microgravity · Hypergravity · Parabolic flight
Received: 24 February 2025 / Accepted: 17 April 2025 / Published online: 25 April 2025
© The Author(s) 2025
Disturbances in human position sense during alterations in gravity: a 
parabolic flight experiment
Bernhard M. Weber1 · Michael Panzirsch1 · Benedikt Pleintinger1 · Martin Stelzer1 · Stella Arand1 · 
Christian Schöttler1 · Ralph Bayer1 · Annette Hagengruber1 · Uwe Proske2
1 3

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
gravity during parabolic flight. However, rather than study­
ing position sense directly, the authors made observations on 
the illusory changes in perceived limb position in response 
to muscle vibration (Goodwin et al. 1972). The method has 
the advantage of producing large changes in position sense 
for which the influence of gravity can be readily studied. 
Other reports on position sense in microgravity were those 
of Bock (1994) and Bringoux et al. (2012).
The explanation preferred by Lackner & DiZio for their 
findings was that spindle output per unit stretch of arm 
muscles was influenced by G-level. Spindle rates can be 
altered by means of muscle length changes and by fusimo­
tor activity. The authors proposed that gravity-dependent 
vestibular stimulation led to changes in fusimotor activation 
of spindles in forearm muscles and this altered the vibra­
tion responses. Our own hypothesis for the gravity effects 
was based on the findings of Bringoux et al. (2012). They 
showed that errors were made in a reaching task, carried 
out during parabolic flight, where participants overshot the 
target in hypergravity and undershot it in microgravity. Add­
ing gravity-like torque, by means of elastic straps stretched 
across the arm before and during the movement recovered 
participants’ performance in microgravity to resemble that 
in normal gravity. The authors postulated that in micrograv­
ity the increased joint torque generated by the elastic straps 
enhanced arm position sense.
We have considered the possibility that the normal posi­
tion signal, especially near the flexion or extension limits of 
a joint’s working range, was likely to include inputs from 
both spindles and joint receptors (Proske 2023). In hyper­
gravity, torque levels at the joint would be expected to 
increase, to raise the joint receptor component of the posi­
tion signal and therefore lead to increases in position sense 
values above those for 1G levels. Similarly, a fall in joint 
torque would lower the joint receptor component and there­
fore reduce position sense values below 1G values. With 
this mechanism in mind, we compared position sense values 
using the three methods and asked the question, were all 
three similarly affected by the changes in gravity?
In the present study we have chosen to measure position 
sense directly, rather than as a vibration illusion. In view of 
the findings of Roach et al. (2023), we have considered the 
possibility of the existence of more than one position sense 
(Weber and Proske 2022). It has led us to re-examine the 
question of the effects of weightlessness on position sense, 
more broadly. Participants were asked to measure position 
sense with each of the three methods, during periods of 
high and low gravity generated during a series of parabolic 
flights. The aim was to try to confirm, during periods of high 
and low gravity, the disturbance of position sense, measured 
with each method.
Methods
Sample
12 adult participants (1female, 11male) 26–53 years old 
(M = 37.9 years, ± 8.2 SD), took part in the present study. 
Participation was voluntary. One of the participants had 
previously taken part in similar parabolic flight campaigns. 
None of the participants performed regular fitness exercises 
with their arms or reported current or past arm injuries. All 
participants underwent a medical assessment before taking 
part in the flight campaign. In addition, their health status 
was checked on the first day of the week of the flight cam­
paign by an aviation physician. Participants were informed 
in advance about the experimental tasks and procedures 
and all provided written, informed consent. The experimen­
tal protocol was approved by a French ethics committee 
(“Comité de protection des personnes Sud-Méditerranée I”; 
ID RCB number: 2023-A01115-40). Ethical aspects of the 
project conformed with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Apparatus
Experimental setup
The experimental setup consisted of an equipment rack 
fixed to a base plate and two seats also on base plates, all 
bolted firmly to the floor of the aircraft. In the equipment 
rack, all necessary hardware components (personal com­
puter, motor controllers, electronical components etc.) were 
firmly locked in place. Two paddle setups, on each side of 
the equipment rack, were installed, facing each other, so that 
two participants could perform the experiment at the same 
time (see Fig.  1). Each setup’s height could be adjusted 
Fig. 1  Experimental Setup: Two participants sat facing one another in 
the set-up. Both gave written consent to publication
 
1 3
127 
Page 2 of 12

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
individually to suit the participant. In front of each partici­
pant were two paddles, which could be moved freely in the 
sagittal plane over a range of 90° from the horizontal (0°) 
to the vertical position (90°). Mechanical stops prevented 
movements beyond this range. Both paddles could be auto­
matically moved to predefined angles by integrated motors. 
For one of the two paddles and its motor, an electromagnetic 
clutch was incorporated which, when released, allowed 
the paddle to move freely, without any frictional or inertia 
effects from the motor. Indicated angles were recorded by 
potentiometers with an angular resolution of ± 0.3°. Selected 
positions of both paddles could be locked in place by motor 
brakes. At one end of each paddle was a soft elbow support 
(with a Velcro strap to hold the elbow in position) and at 
the other end there was a padded hand rest with a handle. 
The elbow rest was positioned so that the elbow pivot point 
and the paddle’s axis of rotation were aligned. The distance 
between elbow rest and hand rest as well as the distance 
between handle and paddle could be individually adjusted.
To ensure body stabilization during microgravity, the 
participants’ feet were strapped to the base plate of the 
experimental setup. To stabilize participants during the 
hypergravity phases, a seat support was placed behind the 
participant which they could lean against or sit on (see 
Fig. 1). All structures were padded with foam for protection. 
At one side of the rack, the experimenter’s working area 
was set up on the floor, equipped with a laptop for monitor­
ing and controlling the experimental procedures.
Experimental software
The different gravitational phases during the parabolae 
(1.8 g, 0 g, 1.8 g, 1 g) were detected using an acceleration 
sensor. For the first hypergravity phase, measurements were 
initiated after gravity values reached above 1.5 g, the micro­
gravity phase after they fell below 0.6 g, and the second 
hypergravity phase when the g-value was back above 1.3 g. 
Finally, normal gravity was triggered when gravity values 
had returned to below 1.15 g (Fig. 2). Each measurement 
phase was initiated only when gravity changes persisted for 
long enough. When conditions were suitable, the measure­
ment proceeded, with the participant receiving their instruc­
tions via headphones. The control of the paddles as well as 
the evaluation of the accelerometer data was implemented 
in Matlab/ Simulink. The control software was executed on 
a real-time Linux platform at 1 kHz sampling rate. Timing 
of the pre-recorded instructions and paddle positions in a 
particular task were controlled by a JAVA program. The log­
ging was implemented in C ++ enabling the automated iden­
tification of each parabola phase in separate files.
The experiments
Participants completed three different experiments: (1) a 
two-arm matching task, (2) a one-arm a pointing task, and 
(3) a one-arm repositioning task. For all three experiments a 
test angle of 60° was used, representing approximately the 
middle of the forearm’s working range.
Two-arm matching
During this task, participants were blindfolded. The experi­
ment started with both forearms in a flexed posture (i.e. 
forearm at 90° to the horizontal). To begin with, forearm 
muscles had to be conditioned, to account for spindle thixo­
tropic properties. With both paddles locked in position, 
the participant carried out isometric contractions of elbow 
flexors of both arms, followed by isometric contractions of 
elbow extensors. The contractions were approximately 20% 
of maximum, 0.5s in duration. To do that, participants were 
asked to pull both arms towards their body (“pull”), or to 
push them away, (“push”). When participants had relaxed, 
the experimental trials were started. One paddle was 
unlocked and the passive forearm of the reference arm was 
automatically moved in the direction of extension to the test 
angle and held in that position. Then the clutch of the other 
paddle opened and they were asked to bring the indicator 
arm into a matching position. Participants were told to move 
the indicator to a position where the two arms felt aligned.
One-arm pointing
In the pointing experiment participants wore an eye patch 
over the eye closest to the reference arm which was also hid­
den behind a cloth. It meant that during pointing neither the 
reference arm nor its shoulder was visible to the participant. 
Before the reference arm was moved to the test angle, it 
was co-conditioned at 90°, as above. Participants carried out 
contractions of flexors followed by contractions of exten­
sors and, once they had relaxed, the arm was automatically 
moved to a chosen test angle. The clutch of the other paddle 
opened and participants were asked to move this pointer 
paddle to a position that they felt corresponded to the posi­
tion of the hidden reference arm. To do that, participants 
grasped the pointer paddle by its handle and moved it into 
position.
One-arm repositioning
Here, participants were also blindfolded. The participant co-
conditioned both antagonists of one arm with isometric con­
tractions. Once they had relaxed, the arm was automatically 
moved to a chosen test angle. It was held at that angle for 
1 3
Page 3 of 12 
127

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
Fig. 2  Examples of flight recordings. Top panel: parabolae timing and 
altitudes: Familiarization parabola #0 and first block of 5 experimental 
parabolae. Second panel: recorded g-values for these parabolae. Third 
panel: expanded view of g-values for a single parabola (parabola #2): 
g values in blue, red bars indicating start and end of experimental trials
 
1 3
127 
Page 4 of 12

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
German Aerospace Center in Oberpfaffenhofen to receive 
a detailed briefing about the experimental procedure and 
safety instructions. In addition, the entire procedure for the 
three experiments was rehearsed on the apparatus.
The parabolic flights were organized and carried out by 
NOVESPACE at Mérignac International Airport in Bor­
deaux. The experimental crew and participants were briefed 
by NOVESPACE before flight regarding general procedures 
and safety regulations during the flight. Two pairs of partici­
pants took part on each of the three subsequent flight days.
On the morning of their flight day, participants completed 
the pre-flight session in the aircraft while on ground. Dur­
ing this session, participants were again reminded about the 
experimental task, setup and procedure. Then, the control 
experiment was carried out as described above.
Immediately pre-flight, all participants (experimenter and 
participants) received a standard dose of Scopolamine (0.7-
1.0 ml for first flyers, 0.5 ml for experienced flyers). Scopol­
amine is the standard medication used to minimise the risk 
of motion sickness during parabolic flights. Side effects can 
be blurred vision, drowsiness, dilated pupils and dry mouth. 
No participants in our study exhibited counter-reactions to 
the drug and the subsequent experimental trials proceeded 
uneventfully. However, one participant experienced motion 
sickness during the repositioning experiment, despite hav­
ing taken the drug and had to abandon the experiment. After 
medication, participants boarded the flight, an Airbus A310.
A complete flight took about 3.5 h and 31 parabolae were 
flown during this period. The first parabola (#0) was used 
for familiarization, i.e. participants simply lay down on 
the floor of the aircraft during the parabola. Then, the first 
pair of participants took up their positions at the setup; they 
were secured with a harness, positioned their feet in the foot 
straps and arms in the lever setup, put on the headphones 
and, depending on the task, the eye patch/blindfold was put 
in place. Meanwhile, the second pair of participants and the 
experimenter were sitting on the floor at the side of the rack, 
secured with belts to the floor of the aircraft.
The typical time sequence for each parabola was ~ 20 s 
hypergravity, ~ 22 s microgravity, again ~ 20 s hypergravity, 
and finally, back to normal gravity. The transitions between 
the various gravity phases were monitored by the acceler­
ometer. When the required g-value had been reached, the 
experiment was started and participants were instructed via 
the headphones. After a break (~ 1 min 45 s), the next parab­
ola was begun (see Fig. 2).
After each participant had completed five parabolae there 
was a break of 5 min, followed by a longer break of 8 min 
after 15 parabolae. During the longer break, the next two 
participants took up their position at the setup, the hand 
rests were adjusted and the same protocol was carried out, 
as before.
2s while the participant remembered its position. Then the 
arm was returned to its starting position before being condi­
tioned a second time. The clutch of the paddle was released 
and the participant was then asked to move their arm to the 
remembered position.
The pre-recorded instructions in all three conditions were 
given via headphones. The contractions in the 90° position 
were announced with “pull-push”, followed up by presenta­
tion of the test angle with the announcement, “test angle”. 
As soon as the clutch on the indicator side opened, the com­
mand “match” was given. Now the participant could set the 
desired matching angle; they had 6 s to do so and for the last 
three seconds there was a countdown “3-2-1”. At the end 
of the countdown, the angle adopted by the indicator arm 
was recorded. This procedure was necessary given the time 
limitations of the gravitational episodes.
Experimental design
There were two experimental sessions: a pre-flight session 
and a flight session. During flight, participants performed 
experimental trials during each gravity phase of a parabola: 
(1) hypergravity (1.8 g), (2) microgravity (0 g), (3) hyper­
gravity (1.8 g) and (4) horizontal flight (1 g). The pre-flight 
data were used to provide a baseline for comparison with 
results acquired during the flight.
During the flight, each participant performed the experi­
mental tasks over fifteen parabolae. An experimental block 
during a parabola included each of the four gravity phases 
(1.8 g, 0 g, 1.8 g, 1 g). This made for a total of 60 trials over 
the 15 parabolae. Each of the three experiments was per­
formed during five consecutive experimental blocks, while 
their order was counterbalanced across participants. The 
same procedure was adopted in the preflight session, except 
that the pauses of about 1 min 45 s between each parab­
ola in flight were shortened to 40 s. Moreover, participants 
only completed two experimental blocks, i.e. two simulated 
parabolae for each condition; 6 blocks x 4 phases = 24 trials. 
The rest period between the three experiments was 100 s.
Since it is known that there are differences in proprio­
ception between the two arms (Goble et al. 2006), partici­
pants were assigned to the two sides of the experimental 
rack so that 6 participants had their dominant arm as the 
reference, while the other 6 had their non-dominant arm as 
the reference.
Procedural arrangements
All participants were informed about the background and 
procedure of the study and about the parabolic flights, in an 
online briefing one month before the experiment. 2–3 weeks 
before the campaign, all participants were also invited to the 
1 3
Page 5 of 12 
127

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
Results
Pre-flight
As a first step, the data acquired on the ground (pre­
flight session) were analysed. Since errors in the differ­
ent experiments were normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilk 
test; W = 0.89), a rmANOVA could be performed, compar­
ing the averaged position errors in the three experiments. 
A significant overall main effect was found in rmANOVA 
(F (2,22) = 10.99; p <.001; η2 = 0.50). Post-comparisons 
indicated that errors were largest for pointing (M = 5.95°; 
SD = 5.64°), which were significantly larger than for match­
ing (M = 0.97°; SD = 4.0°; p <.0025, two-tailed testing, 2tt) 
and repositioning (M = -0.19°; SD = 3.96°; p <.007; 2tt; see 
Table 1).
In-flight, single participant
Examples of position sense measurements for one partici­
pant are shown in Fig. 3. During two-arm matching at 1G, 
(NG), the mean error for the 5 episodes of horizontal flight 
was 4.4°. That is, the participant matched the position of 
their reference arm by placing the indicator 4.4° further 
in the direction of extension. For the first period of hyper­
gravity (HG 1) the mean error into extension increased to 
4.8°. It then fell to 2.5° during the episode of microgravity 
(MG), to reach a value of 7.7° during the second period of 
hypergravity (HG 2). In other words, in relation to errors at 
1G, there was an increase in hypergravity and a decrease in 
microgravity.
For one-arm pointing, the pattern of errors was similar. 
The NG value for the mean of the 5 trials was 7.1° in the 
direction of extension. This increased to 10.9° during HG 
1 and to 10.6° during HG 2. In microgravity it fell to 5.7°. 
A feature of the errors in pointing was that while increases 
in errors in HG and falls in MG were smaller relative to the 
NG value, compared with two-arm matching, all pointing 
errors lay further in the direction of extension of the arm, 
including the value for NG. Finally, for repositioning the 
errors were all smaller than for matching and pointing. The 
NG value was 0.5°. This fell to -1.8° during HG 1, that is, 
the mean error was now 1.8° in the direction of flexion. The 
error was again − 1.8° for HG 2 and − 0.6° for MG.
In-flight, group data
Group errors for the 12 participants are shown in Fig. 4. It 
can be seen that errors in repositioning were much smaller 
than in matching and pointing. For pointing and matching 
the trend of an increase in errors during hypergravity and a 
decrease during microgravity, relative to the normal gravity 
Data analysis
For two-arm matching, the angles of the reference and indi­
cator arms were recorded. The matching error was calcu­
lated as the difference between the two angles (reference 
angle - indicator angle), where positive values corresponded 
to errors in the direction of arm extension and negative val­
ues in the direction of flexion. The same was done for one-
arm pointing; the angle of the hidden reference arm was 
compared with the pointed value. The error for one-arm 
repositioning was calculated as the difference between the 
remembered angle and the repositioned angle. For the fol­
lowing analyses, the recorded error measures were averaged 
across all trials for one experiment (i.e. 2 blocks during pre­
flight, 5 blocks for each gravitational phase during flight).
The error measures were analysed with repeated measures 
ANOVA (rmANOVA) comparing the three experiments 
(matching vs. pointing vs. repositioning) in the preflight 
session and a 3 (experiment: matching vs. pointing vs. repo­
sitioning) x 3 (gravity: HG, MG, NG) rmANOVA for the 
flight session. Sphericity was checked using Mauchly’s test. 
Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were made if non-sphe­
ricity was indicated by this test. Alpha levels of post-hoc 
comparisons were Bonferroni-Holm corrected. In case of 
non-normality of the error distributions, non-parametric 
Friedman tests and subsequent Wilcoxon signed-rank tests 
with Bonferroni-Holm alpha corrections were performed. 
For all comparisons one-tailed tests (1tt) were performed 
to verify directional hypotheses, otherwise two-tailed tests 
(2tt) were chosen.
Data for one participant during the repositioning experi­
ment is missing, since they had to abandon the experiment. 
As the result of a problem with data recording during the 
pre-flight session, values for two participants from one of 
the two experimental blocks in this session are missing.
Table 1  Means and SD of errors [°] for the three experiments and 
gravity conditions for all 12 participants. P-values for the comparison 
between the in-flight normal gravity baseline and hypergravity (mean 
of episode 1 and 2) or microgravity in square brackets. During flight, 
data of one participant is missing for repositioning
N = 12
Matching
Pointing
Repositioning
Pre-flight
0.97 (4.00)
5.95 (5.64)
-0.19 (3.96)
Flight
Hypergravity 1
3.63 (2.78)
11.11 (4.72)
-0.78 (4.81)
Hypergravity 2
3.33 (4.23)
11.32 (4.25)
-0.22 (4.67)
Hypergravity (Comb.)
3.48 (3.29)
[p =.0497]
11.21 (4.38)
[p =.00222]
-0.50 (4.62)
Microgravity
0.35 (3.50)
[p =.0121]
7.28 (5.63)
[p =.0583]
0.23 (3.35)
Normal Gravity
2.48 (3.80)
9.09 (4.42)
0.01 (3.94)
1 3
127 
Page 6 of 12

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
performing the Wilcoxon test in the three experiments 
(Z = 0.27–2.12; 2tt).
Further analysis used only the in-flight values for normal 
gravity (NG). The reason was that during flight there were 
small fluctuations in g-values (see Fig. 2). For this reason, 
and in order to take into account possible effects of Scopol­
amine administration, comparisons were limited to within 
flight.
Next, the normal gravity episodes (NG) were compared 
with the microgravity (MG) and hypergravity (HG) epi­
sodes, (see Table 1; Fig. 4).
For matching, two Wilcoxon tests were performed, indi­
cating that error values were significantly lower (i.e. less 
forearm extension) for MG (M = 0.35°; SD = 3.50°) com­
pared to NG (M = 2.48°; SD = 3.80°; p =.0121, one-tailed 
testing, 1tt). On the other hand, for HG, error values were 
significantly higher (M = 3.48°; SD = 3.29°; p =.0497, 1tt) 
compared to the NG baseline.
Wilcoxon comparisons for pointing showed a trend for 
error values to be lower in MG (M = 7.28°; SD = 5.63°) com­
pared to the NG values (M = 9.09°; SD = 4.42°), although 
the required level of significance was not reached (p =.0583, 
value is clearly apparent. Values for matching were smaller 
than for pointing.
In-flight errors were not normally distributed (Shapiro-
Wilk test; W = 0.75; p =.00191), making it necessary to 
process the data with non-parametric statistics. First, it was 
tested whether there was an overall effect of experiments 
on error values during the normal gravity episode. Fried­
man indicated significant differences (χ2(2) = 17.6; p <.001). 
Again, errors in pointing (M = 9.09°; SD = 4.42°) were 
significantly larger compared to repositioning (M = 0.01°; 
SD = 3.94°, p =.00669, 2tt) and matching (M = 2.48°; 
SD = 3.8°; p =.00665, 2tt, see Table 1) as indicated by Wil­
coxon tests.
Next, the errors in the two hypergravity episodes HG1 
and HG2 were compared. For all three experiments, no sig­
nificant difference was found in Wilcoxon tests (Z = 0.39 
− 0.71, 2tt). Therefore, errors in HG1 and HG2 were com­
bined and averaged for the subsequent analysis and labelled 
as hypergravity condition (HG). Additionally, the preflight 
error values were compared to the normal gravity flight epi­
sodes (NG), but no significant difference was found when 
Fig. 3  Data from a single participant. a: Two-arm matching, b: One-
arm pointing, c: One-arm repositioning. Values for individual trials are 
joined as grey lines. Each line represents a single parabola. Mean error 
values for the five parabolae are shown as black circles (± SD). The 
convention was used that positive values were assigned to errors in the 
direction of elbow extension, negative values to errors in the direction 
of flexion
 
1 3
Page 7 of 12 
127

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
repositioning, the data suggested that position sense values 
were unresponsive to changes in gravity. Given these differ­
ences in outcomes, the current observations emphasize the 
importance of declaring the method used whenever position 
sense is measured, both at ground level and under condi­
tions of weightlessness. Our observations suggest that of the 
three methods used in the present study, with the method of 
repositioning, it is not possible to reveal any disturbance of 
position sense by gravity and that if gravity effects were to 
be studied further, the preferred methods to use would have 
to be matching or pointing.
In Roach et al. (2023), before each measurement, elbow 
muscles were conditioned in such a way that it brought out a 
thixotropic pattern in the distribution of the position errors. 
Since muscle spindles are the only known sensory recep­
tors to exhibit thixotropy (Proske et al. 1993), such patterns 
were interpreted as evidence for spindles being involved in 
generation of the position signals. There was evidence of 
spindle participation in position sense measured with two-
arm matching and one-arm pointing, while for repositioning 
the evidence was weak. Such an outcome reflected a similar 
pattern to that seen with gravity effects in the present study. 
It tempted us to say that when spindle participation in a 
measurement could be demonstrated, this made it likely that 
gravity effects could be revealed as well. It was as though 
in a measurement of position sense the gravity effects were 
1tt). Again, error values for HG were significantly higher 
(M = 11.21°; SD = 4.38°) compared to NG (p <.00222, 1tt).
For the repositioning task, the two Wilcoxon tests com­
paring NG (M = 0.01°; SD = 3.94°) with HG (M = -0.50°; 
SD = 4.62°) and MG (M = 0.23°; SD = 3.35°) did not reveal 
any significant differences.
In summary, for matching, during hypergravity position 
errors increased significantly compared with 1G values, 
while in microgravity they fell significantly. For pointing, 
errors during hypergravity increased significantly, but the 
fall in errors during microgravity failed to reach signifi­
cance. By contrast, errors during repositioning showed no 
significant changes during either increases or decreases in 
gravity. In addition, the control values in normal gravity for 
repositioning were significantly smaller than for pointing 
(p <.003, 2tt).
Discussion
When we embarked on the present study, it was to ask 
the question, did gravity influence position sense, no mat­
ter what method of measurement was used (Weber and 
Proske 2022)? The present study has shown that for posi­
tion sense measured by matching or pointing, changes in 
gravity had significant effects on the measured values. For 
Fig. 4  Matching, pointing and repositioning errors during the different 
gravity episodes for 12 participants. Display of the mean errors (± SD, 
shown by the error bars). Dark blue hatched columns, hypergravity 
(HG 1 and 2), light blue columns, microgravity (MG), grey-scale, nor­
mal gravity (NG). Values for individual participants shown as grey 
dots. *p <.05; **p <.01
 
1 3
127 
Page 8 of 12

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
by Bringoux et al. (2012) that during parabolic flight reach­
ing errors were made with changes in gravity. Participants 
overshot the target in hypergravity and undershot it in 
microgravity. Adding gravity-like torque, by means of elas­
tic straps, stretched across the arm before and during the 
movement, recovered participants’ performance in micro­
gravity to resemble that in normal gravity. The authors 
postulated that in microgravity the increased joint torque 
generated by the elastic straps enhanced arm position sense. 
One possible reason for this was an increase in skeletomotor 
activity required to overcome the additional torque gener­
ated by the straps and this would be accompanied by co-
activated fusimotor activity that raised spindle discharges.
We have suggested an alternate explanation. The normal 
position signal, especially when generated near the flexion 
or extension limits of a joint’s working range, is likely to 
include inputs from both spindles and joint receptors (Pro­
ske 2023; Proske and Weber 2023). Joint receptors have 
an “activation angle” where they begin to generate a main­
tained discharge, which in animal preparations is 15°-20° 
short of the limit of movement at the joint. Therefore, when 
a position is adopted, which is getting closer to the joint 
limit, and the activation angle has been exceeded, there will 
be signal mixing from two sources, stretched spindles and 
activated joint receptors. The details have been spelt out in 
Proske (2024a). When hypergravity imposes extra torque on 
the joint, the activation angle will be moved further towards 
the middle of the movement range, increasing the opportu­
nity for mixing, thereby raising the joint receptor component 
of the position signal. In microgravity, if the arm becomes 
weightless, there will be no standing torque on the joint and, 
as a consequence, joint receptor input will fall, lowering 
the position signal. Stretching elastic straps across the joint 
would increase joint torque and raise the joint receptor com­
ponent of the position signal. That, in turn, would recover 
position sense values in microgravity to normal levels. To 
further test these ideas we plan, in the future, to measure 
position sense in microgravity with joint torque raised by 
means of elastics stretched across the elbow joint.
There is an interesting report by Motanova et al. (2022) 
describing construction of a “penguin axial loading suit” 
for use in microgravity conditions. The purpose of the suit 
was to create axial load, to help compensate for the lack of 
proprioceptive afferent feedback in microgravity. The suit 
incorporates a system of inbuilt elastic elements which are 
distributed according to the demands of selected antagonist 
muscle groups. The ideas underlying construction of such a 
suit support our joint receptor hypothesis.
In the present study, for pointing, the error values were 
significantly larger than for matching (Fig. 4). Not only were 
values larger during changes in gravity, but control errors at 
1G were larger as well. A similar trend in the distribution 
linked in some way with the participation of spindles. That 
conclusion strengthened our view that spindles played a key 
role in the observed gravity-dependent changes in position 
sense.
In the present study, for matching and pointing there 
were increases in errors in hypergravity and decreases in 
microgravity. What might that mean? As mentioned, it is 
believed that muscle spindles provide the position signal 
during movements about a joint; an increase in spindle dis­
charge signals a longer muscle, a more flexed or extended 
joint (Matthews 1988). We suggest that there is a spindle 
discharge - joint angle relation for the determination of 
position sense, established during development (Held and 
Bauer 1967). If, as a result of an increase in gravity, the 
position signal increases, this would be expressed in both 
arms, the reference arm sitting at 60° and the indicator 
moved by the participant. Since the reference remains fixed 
at the test angle, the signal coming from it would be higher 
than expected from 1G values. The indicator would move 
towards the position of the reference, until a point was 
reached where the signals from the two arms matched. For 
elbow flexors this would be a position where the indica­
tor arm was more extended than the reference. If spindle 
discharge in elbow flexors decreases in microgravity, this 
would lead to a fall in position errors, producing values for 
elbow extension below those for 1G levels.
This argument does not consider the spindle signals in the 
antagonist extensors. Presumably, in real life, it is the effect 
of gravity on the balance of discharges in flexors and exten­
sors which determines the direction of the errors. However, 
in the present study, all of the errors for matching and point­
ing were in the direction of elbow extension (Fig. 4), includ­
ing the values in normal gravity, suggesting that the signal 
coming from the flexors dominated the outcome.
It could be argued that the smaller errors in micrograv­
ity represented a more accurate measurement and not be a 
disturbance at all. We propose that whenever the prevailing 
spindle discharge rates are altered, up or down, away from 
their normal 1G level, this should be seen as a disturbance. 
These gravity-dependent alterations in the spindle rate: joint 
angle relation lead the participant to perceive their arms in 
positions which are unexpected and therefore makes them 
unsure of the reliability of their movements when these are 
made in the absence of vision.
Here it should, perhaps, be remembered that there is 
some evidence for gravity-based influences acting on posi­
tion sense measured at ground level, under 1G conditions. 
When participants were asked to judge elbow position with 
respect to the vertical, they performed better than when 
asked to focus on joint angles (Soechting 1982).
Why should spindle discharges increase or decrease dur­
ing gravity changes? In an arm reaching task it was shown 
1 3
Page 9 of 12 
127

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
The observations made in the present experiments sup­
port the view that in repositioning there was no direct 
involvement of spindles. Despite the significant changes in 
gravity-dependent errors in matching and pointing, presum­
ably mediated by changes in spindle afferent activity, for 
repositioning, errors in both hypergravity and micrograv­
ity remained non-significant. Furthermore, for reposition­
ing, even the value during normal gravity was lower than 
for pointing. We conclude that of the three methods, repo­
sitioning was the most accurate and position sense values 
remained unresponsive to changes in gravity, suggesting 
that spindles played no role in this sense. Presumably, repo­
sitioning values were generated entirely centrally. In the 
future, we want to confirm this conclusion by repeating the 
repositioning experiment, but carry out the memorizing and 
repositioning stages in different gravity phases.
We suggest that the instruction to the participant, 
“Remember this angle”, leads them to focus their attention 
on the position of the arm, which immediately provides 
them with the precise angular information for that position. 
A memory is triggered, expressed in terms of angles of joints 
and lengths of muscles, but which, at the time of measure­
ment, does not involve any ongoing spindle activity in arm 
muscles. The memory is referred to a central storage site for 
spatial information and kept there, ready for the instruction 
to reproduce the remembered position. These ideas are, of 
course, purely speculative and it is our intention to put them 
to the test in future experiments.
Looking more broadly, the present data support the view 
that different methods of measuring position sense involve 
fundamentally different underlying processes which will 
impact the meaning of a particular measurement. This 
is particularly relevant for the method of repositioning 
which is the preferred method used in most proprioceptive 
research and is widely employed in clinical settings. What 
we are learning is that the three different methods of mea­
suring position sense are all likely to have different underly­
ing mechanisms and it could be argued that there are several 
distinct position senses.
There appear to be two sources of influence determining 
human position sense. One is afferent signals of a periph­
eral origin providing information about muscle lengths and 
joint angles. The other is a central repository of recently 
remembered information concerning position of the body 
and its parts in egocentric and extrapersonal space, which 
can be accessed to provide accurate spatial information 
about limb position. The three methods of measurement 
used in the present study seem to show a progressive transi­
tion between these two influences; from one which relies 
almost entirely on peripheral afferent information, two-arm 
matching, to one that contains elements of both peripheral 
and central influences, one-arm pointing, to one which is 
of pointing errors was observed by Roach et al. (2023). It 
suggested that in normal gravity there was an offset, in the 
direction of arm extension, in the measured values of point­
ing errors. One possible explanation is that for pointing the 
proprioceptive information coming from the hidden refer­
ence arm must be converted to a visual frame of reference to 
guide the pointing arm. Such a conversion comes with addi­
tional errors when compared with a purely proprioceptive 
measurement (Darling et al. 2024). We suggest that such an 
offset was present in the parabolic measurements. A detailed 
explanation for the size and direction of the offset remains 
elusive.
The question arises, do frame of reference considerations 
also apply to two-arm matching? Here we have always 
assumed that both arms were in the same postural frame 
of reference (Velay et al. 1989). Certainly, the instructions 
to the participants were always to align the position of one 
arm with that of the other arm and no reference was made to 
gravity. Evidence in support of two-arm matching operating 
within a single frame of reference is the symmetrical distri­
bution of thixotropic errors in both arms (Roach et al. 2023). 
From another point of view, two-arm matching is consid­
ered a low-level judgement, made within a single frame of 
reference (Heroux et al., 2022).
The findings for repositioning were rather different from 
those for matching and pointing. The errors were all rather 
small and there was no significant difference between posi­
tion sense values during changes in gravity. Our original 
working hypothesis for repositioning had been that when 
a participant was asked to remember a chosen angle, the 
spindle discharge generated in arm muscles at that angle 
was stored in memory. Subsequently, when the participant 
was asked to reposition the arm, the spindle discharge for 
that angle was retrieved from memory and compared with 
the ongoing level of activity, as the arm moved towards the 
remembered angle, until the two matched.
However, such an explanation turned out to be wrong! 
The data of Roach et al. (2023) suggested that in reposition­
ing ongoing spindle activity did not play a significant role. 
It raised the possibility that in generating the position signal 
the necessary information was likely derived from central 
sources (Proske 2024b). In support of that view, Roach et al. 
(2023) did an additional experiment where they introduced 
thixotropic disturbances after the memorizing stage and 
before the reproduction stage. The data showed that this did 
not alter repositioning errors. If spindles had been involved, 
it should have led to increases in position errors. While we 
cannot rule out participation of sensory receptors other than 
spindles in the repositioning process, our current preferred 
interpretation is that position information in repositioning 
was largely derived from central sources (Proske 2024b).
1 3
127 
Page 10 of 12

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit ​h​t​t​p​:​/​/​c​r​e​a​t​i​v​e​c​o​m​m​o​n​s​.​o​
r​g​/​l​i​c​e​n​s​e​s​/​b​y​/​4​.​0​/.
References
Bock O (1994) Joint position sense in simulated changed-gravity envi­
ronments. Aviat Space Environ Med 65:621–626
Bringoux L, Blouin J, Coyle T, Ruget H, Mouchnino L (2012) Effect 
of gravity-like torque on goal-directed arm movements in micro­
gravity. J Neurophysiol 107:2541–2548
Cole J (1995) Pride and a daily marathon, 1st edn. MIT Press
Darling WG, Zuck BI, Mikhail L, Adhikari J (2024) Proprioceptive 
acuity for landmarks on the hands and digits. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​
0​0​7​/​s​0​0​2​2​1​-​0​2​3​-​0​6​7​6​1​-​z. Experimental Brain Research
Desmurget M, Rossetti Y, Prablanc C, Jeannerod M, Stelmach GE 
(1995) Representation of hand position prior to movement and 
motor variability. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 73:262–272. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​
o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​3​9​/​y​9​5​-​0​3​7
Goble DJ, Lewis CA, Brown SH (2006) Upper limb asymmetries 
in the utilization of proprioceptive feedback. Exp Brain Res 
168:307–311
Goodwin GM, McCloskey DI, Matthews PBC (1972) The contri­
bution of muscle afferents to kinaesthesia shown by vibration 
induced illusions of movement and by the effects of paralyzing 
joint afferents. Brain 95:705–748
Held R, Bauer JA Jr (1967) Visually guided reaching in infant mon­
keys after restricted rearing. Science 155(3763):718–720
Héroux ME, Butler AA, Robertson LS, Fisher G, Gandevia SC (2022) 
Proprioception: a new look at an old concept. J Appl Physiol 
132(3):811–814
Kenyon RV, Young LR (1986) MIT/Canadian vestibular experiments 
on Spacelab-1 mission: 5. Postural responses following exposure 
to weightlessness. Exp Brain Res 64:335–346
Lackner JR, DiZio P (1992) Gravitoinertial force level affects the 
appreciation of limb position during muscle vibration. Brain Res 
592:175–180
Matthews PBC (1988) Proprioceptors and their contribution to 
somatosensory mapping: complex messages require complex 
processing. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 66:430–438
Motanova E et al (2022) Application of space technologies aimed at 
proprioceptive correction in terrestrial medicine in Russia. Front 
Physiol 13:921862
Proske U (2024a) Joint receptors play a role in position sense after all! 
J Physiol 60215:3609–3612
Proske U (2024b) Measuring position sense. Exp Physiol. ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​
o​r​g​/​1​0​.​1​1​1​3​/​E​P​0​9​2​1​9​0
Proske U, Gandevia SC (2012) The proprioceptive senses: their roles 
in signaling body shape, body position and movement, and mus­
cle force. Physiol Rev 92:1651–1697
Proske U, Weber BM (2023) Proprioceptive disturbances in weight­
lessness revisited. Npj Microgravity 9(1):64
Proske U, Morgan DL, Gregory JE (1993) Thixotropy in skeletal 
muscle and in muscle spindles: A review. Progress Neurobiol 
41(6):705–721
Roach C, Love C, Allen T, Proske U (2023) The contribution of muscle 
spindles to position sense measured with three different methods. 
Exp Brain Res 241(10):2433–2450
concerned predominantly with central sources of informa­
tion, repositioning.
Gravity appears to exert an influence on position sense 
only when there is evidence of a direct contribution from 
spindles, as seen in matching and pointing. For reposition­
ing it appears that the central influences predominate. What 
is unexpected is the finding that the position values derived 
centrally are more accurate than those which involve spin­
dles. The concept of a central repository of position infor­
mation operating independently of peripheral influences is 
also novel. Presumably the stored information is acquired, 
in part, through memories of past kinesthetic activities.
To conclude, this study has raised a number of issues. 
Does gravity exert its influence on position sense through 
changes in torque levels at a joint, leading to an alteration 
of the joint receptor component of the position signal? If 
so, why is this not expressed in position sense measured by 
repositioning? Assuming the existence of a body schema 
as the central repository of spatial information, how is the 
communication carried out between the body periphery and 
central sites? Are spindles involved in this process? Given 
that the three methods studied here measure essentially the 
same thing, why are there such substantial differences in the 
underlying mechanisms? If we are right and repositioning 
operates substantially independently of peripheral sources 
of positional information, what is the significance of that? 
All of these issues will, hopefully, be addressed in future 
experiments.
Author contributions  Bernhard M. Weber was the project manager, 
developed the experimental design together with Uwe Proske and 
was responsible for organizing, conducting and analyzing the experi­
ments. The study idea and general conception was developed by Uwe 
Proske. He wrote a first draft of the paper together with Bernhard M. 
Weber. Michael Panzirsch and Martin Stelzer were responsible for the 
implementation and testing of the experimental software. Benedikt 
Pleintinger, Stella Arand, Christian Schöttler, Bernhard M. Weber, Mi­
chael Panzirsch, Ralph Bayer and Annette Hagengruber were involved 
in building and adapting the experimental setup. All authors read, re­
vised and approved the final version of the paper.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 
DEAL.
Data availability  The dataset generated and analysed during the cur­
rent study are available in the Zenodo repository, ​h​t​t​p​s​:​/​/​d​o​i​.​o​r​g​/​1​0​.​5​2​
8​1​/​z​e​n​o​d​o​.​1​3​3​7​8​1​2​7.
Declarations
Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
1 3
Page 11 of 12 
127

Experimental Brain Research (2025) 243:127
Weber BM, Panzirsch M, Stulp F, Schneider S (2020) Sensorimotor 
performance and haptic support in simulated weightlessness. Exp 
Brain Res 238:2373–2384
Young LR, Oman CM, Watt DG, Money KE, Lichtenberg BK (1984) 
Spatial orientation in weightlessness and readaptation to Earth’s 
gravity. Science 225(4658):205–208
Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris­
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Sarlegna FR, Sainburg RL (2009) The roles of vision and propriocep­
tion in the planning of reaching movements. Adv Exp Med Biol 
629:317–335
Soechting JF (1982) Does position sense at the elbow reflect a sense of 
elbow joint or one of limb orientation? Brain Res 248(2):392–395
Velay JL, Roll J, Paillard J (1989) Elbow position sense in man: 
contrasting results in matching and pointing. Hum Move Sci 
8:177–193
Weber BM, Proske U (2022) Limb position sense and sensorimotor 
performance under conditions of weightlessness. Life Sci Space 
Res 32:63–69
1 3
127 
Page 12 of 12
