Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Ethical considerations for the age of
non-governmental space exploration
Allen Seylani1,28, Aman Singh Galsinh
2,28, Alexia Tasoula3,4,28, Anu R I5,6,
Andrea Camera7, Jean Calleja-Agius
8, Joseph Borg
9, Chirag Goel10,
JangKeun Kim
11, Kevin B. Clark12,13,14, Saswati Das15, Shehbeel Arif16,
Michael Boerrigter17, Caroline Coffey
4, Nathaniel Szewczyk
4,
Christopher E. Mason
11, Maria Manoli
18,29, Fathi Karouia
19,20,21,29,
Hansjörg Schwertz
22,23,24,29
, Afshin Beheshti
25,26,29
&
Dana Tulodziecki
27,29
Mounting ambitions and capabilities for public and private, non-government
sector crewed space exploration bring with them an increasingly diverse set of
space travelers, raising new and nontrivial ethical, legal, and medical policy
and practice concerns which are still relatively underexplored. In this piece, we
lay out several pressing issues related to ethical considerations for selecting
space travelers and conducting human subject research on them, especially in
the context of non-governmental and commercial/private space operations.
It has been over 50 years since the ﬁrst human walked on the Moon.
Since then, most commercialized spaceﬂights have been contracts
granted to private companies by various governments to launch
satellites, e.g., communication and GPS devices, into Earth’s orbit. In
recent years, the deﬁnition of commercial spaceﬂight has expanded to
include human transportation between Earth and habitats in Low Earth
Orbit and future lunar or other extraterrestrial outposts. Once
considered nearly impossible, commercial space travel is now a reality,
due to rapid technological advancement in the private sector, large-
scale investment from governments, and continued public interest.
With the ﬁrst crewed launch of SpaceX Dragon to the International
Space Station (ISS), on May 30, 20201, a new era of public-private
spaceﬂight partnership has emerged. Private companies such as Boe-
ing, Virgin Galactic, Axiom, Sierra Space, and Blue Origin now create a
Received: 11 December 2022
Accepted: 5 December 2023
Check for updates
1School of Medicine, University of California, Riverside. 92521 Botanical Garden Dr, Riverside, CA 92507, USA. 2School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and
Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3FX, UK. 3Department of Life Science Engineering, FH Technikum, Vienna, Austria. 4Heritage College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH, USA. 5Department of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, MVR Cancer Centre and Research Institute,
Calicut, India. 6Department of Clinical Biochemistry, MVR Cancer Centre and Research Institute, Calicut, India. 7Department of Molecular Medicine,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 8Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta,
MSD2080 Msida, Malta. 9Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, MSD2080 Msida, Malta. 10North-
western University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. 11Department of Physiology & Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
12Cures Within Reach, Chicago, IL 60602, USA. 13Peace Innovation Institute, The Hague 2511, Netherlands & Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305, USA.
14Biometrics and Nanotechnology Councils, Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers, New York, NY 10016-5997, USA. 15Department of Bio-
chemistry, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. 16Center for Data-Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 17Deep Space Biology, San Francisco, CA, USA. 18School of Law, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UB, UK.
19Blue Marble Space Institute for Science, Exobiology Branch, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 20Space Research Within Reach, San
Francisco, CA, USA. 21Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 22Molecular Medicine Program at the University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. 23Division of Occupational Medicine at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. 24Occupational Medicine at
Billings Clinic Bozeman, Bozeman, MT 59715, USA. 25Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
26Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, US. 27Department of Philosophy,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 28These authors contributed equally: Allen Seylani, Aman Singh Galsinh, Alexia Tasoula. 29These authors jointly
supervised this work: Maria Manoli, Fathi Karouia, Hansjörg Schwertz, Afshin Beheshti, Dana Tulodziecki.
e-mail: hansjorg.schwertz@u2m2.utah.edu;
afshin.beheshti@bmsis.org; dtulodzi@purdue.edu
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

steep commercial demand for crewed spaceﬂight, both for technolo-
gical and recreational purposes. NASA has further partnered with
Axiom Space for commercial utilization of the ISS until the world’s ﬁrst
commercial space station is built by 20282. There is currently a wide
range of private/commercial spaceﬂights, ranging from suborbital
ﬂights lasting mere minutes to Axiom’s 1-2 week ISS missions to the
ﬁrst all-civilian orbital commercial spaceﬂight mission referred to as
‘Inspiration4’ (I4), comparable in duration (and health risks) to orbital
shuttle missions1–3.
Historically, government-sponsored spaceﬂights were mission-
based and geared towards national interests, e.g., technological lea-
dership, improving national security, creating high-quality jobs, or
advancements in research. After the Cold War era and the “Space
Race,” government investment in space exploration declined. In con-
trast, the idea of commercial spaceﬂight continues to gain signiﬁcant
popularity and the economic opportunities linked to this are enor-
mous. This has been accompanied by an inﬂux of investment and the
development of new technology, such as initial viable Reusable Launch
Vehicle models by SpaceX4. Despite this rapid technology develop-
ment, governmental regulation of commercial spaceﬂight lags behind.
There are some requirements commercial spaceﬂight providers have
to meet, including requirements concerning environmental safety,
payload, payload re-entry, ﬁnancial stability, and coverage for max-
imum probable loss5. Yet, there has been only limited regulation
concerning the selection and training of non-government-sponsored
astronauts and no formal oversight governing medical research on
such crews, whether orbital or suborbital. The United Nations Ofﬁce
for Outer Space Affairs has collated national space laws relating to
space activities from 42 countries6. While the regulations listed there
cover a wide range of ﬁelds, such as objects in space, radio-
communication, and space activities, there is a general lack of health-
associated regulations. This is a symptom of a bigger problem where
there is little oversight of private sector spaceﬂight participants which,
with Inspiration4, dearMoon7, and the upcoming Polaris program8, are
already a reality.
An increase in commercial/private and civilian space missions
with a more diverse crew may provide an opportunity to collect data
on health issues in space. While these data could shape medical stan-
dards and improve treatment choices for prolonged spaceﬂight, their
collection and management should require strict regulation. At the
same time, as spacefarers shift from professionally trained astronauts
to private individuals without rigorous preparation or with existing
medical conditions, there is a need to reﬁne selection criteria and
training for non-governmental space travelers. Yet, despite their
importance and urgency, these considerations have gone relatively
unexplored9.
In this paper, we will lay out several pressing issues related to
ethical considerations for selecting space travelers and research
practices, especially in the context of non-governmental and private
space operations. Although there are many other ethical issues related
to space exploration – both commercial and otherwise10–19– our focus
here is on ethical considerations regarding selection and human sub-
ject research. Note that while some of the issues we raise might be
covered by guidelines, regulations, or law, this does not diminish the
ethical considerations we discuss. A good example illustrating this
point is NASA’s recent decision to unify the effective radiation expo-
sure for male and female astronauts so as to not exceed 600 mSv,
which translates to having to remain below 3% mean risk of cancer
mortality above the non-exposed baseline mean, despite differences in
male and female radiation-based cancer risk20,21. This decision is highly
controversial, precisely because it is viewed by many as ethically pro-
blematic. Likewise, signing a consent form to undertake a certain
activity (whether employer-mandated or not) does not make the
proposed activity or consent process ethically unquestionable21.
Indeed, our point here is that ethical considerations resulting from the
increase in private and commercial spaceﬂight arise despite estab-
lished rules and guidelines22,23.
A note on terminology: SpaceX, Axiom, and others refer to their
travelers as ‘crew’. This has important consequences since the limited
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) guidelines24 that are applicable
to non-professional astronauts are somewhat more stringent for crew
than ‘ordinary’ spaceﬂight occupants. To bypass ambiguity, we prefer
the term ‘spaceﬂight occupants’ (SOs), using it to refer to non-
professional space travelers lacking substantial spaceﬂight training.
Further, we use the terms ‘laws’ and ‘regulations’ to refer to binding law
and the neutral terms ‘guidelines’, ‘recommendations’, and ‘policy’ to
refer to non-binding guiding instruments.
Considerations on governmental vs. non-
governmental spaceﬂight
Biological hazards of spaceﬂight
The selection of professional astronauts is highly regulated because
space travel and habitation are demanding and dangerous. Current
space missions to the ISS in Low Earth Orbit and future missions
pushing the boundaries of human space exploration towards the
Moon and Mars are characterized by exposure to space radiation, such
as galactic cosmic rays (GCR), solar particle events (SPE), and trapped
radiation25,
changing
gravity
ﬁelds,
acceleration/deceleration
phenomena26, isolation, and conﬁnement27 in a hostile and closed
environment28 and, ﬁnally, the increasingly far distance from Earth
(Fig. 1). Exposure to GCR/SPE is potentially the most signiﬁcant single
health hazard for Low Earth Orbit; for deep-space crewed missions
beyond the Earth’s protective magnetic ﬁeld this risk proﬁle increases
dramatically28. Recently, NASA increased an individualastronaut’s total
career effective radiation dose (independent of age at exposure and
sex) due to spaceﬂight radiation exposure to less than 600 mSv,
translating into a mean risk increase of cancer mortality (REID) of
below 3% above the non-exposed baseline mean21. This change was
implemented following a study carried out under the auspices of the
National Academies of Sciences29. However, these standards remain
controversial, especially in light of predicted REID ranging between 6-
10% for females exposed at ages 20, 40, and 60 years for a simulated
Mars Mission20. Of note, most international partners use a higher
career dose limit of 1,000mSV (independent of sex and age).
Health concerns and ethical considerations regarding commercial
space travel are of great importance considering that the aforemen-
tioned potential hazards can severely interfere with many physiologi-
cal processes, such as physiological homeostasis on a cellular and
Distance
Confinement
Hostile and closed 
environments
Changing 
gravity fields
Galactic cosmic rays
Fig. 1 | The Five Hazards in Space Contributing to Increased Health Risks. The
ﬁgure exempliﬁes the main space ﬂight hazards as used by NASA for the Human
Research Road Map, such as distance, conﬁnement, hostile and closed environ-
ments, galactic cosmic rays and space radiation, and changing gravity ﬁelds.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
2

molecular level (Fig. 2), leading to microbiome shifts30,31, inducing
dysregulated mitochondrial function32, and causing oxidative stress33.
Furthermore, several space hazards cause DNA damage28,30, affect
telomere length30, induce signiﬁcant differences in DNA methylation,
and alter accessibility of chromatin regions and speciﬁc DNA
epitopes30,34. Such cellular and molecular effects lead to serious
pathophysiology and health consequences25, including but not limited
to: changes in the cardiovascular system including ﬂuid shifts, ortho-
static intolerance, reduced ventricle size, thrombus formation28,35–39,
musculoskeletal defects deﬁned as
muscle
atrophy and bone
loss30,40–42, central nervous system alterations including ﬂuid shifts,
neurocognitive and psychiatric alteration and Space-Associated
Neuro-ocular Syndrome (SANS)43,44, immune system dysfunction,
initiation of malignant processes45 due to loss of DNA integrity, failed
DNA
repair
mechanisms,
mutations,
and
chromosomal
rearrangements46. Nevertheless, while knowledge mounts, there
remains a lack of data addressing individual differences among
astronauts, such as age, sex, and genetic background, contributing to
the challenges of accurately predicting radiation hazards and
outcomes28.
Ethical issues related to the dangers and selection of SOs
Given these signiﬁcant spaceﬂight hazards, stringent selection criteria
are important to protect astronaut and SO health and to help ensure
that missions can be completed successfully. For instance, the ISS
Multilateral Space Medicine Board provides guidance about travel to
the ISS by private individuals47,48 and NASA has signiﬁcantly strength-
ened its health-oriented recommendations and guidelines over the last
two decades. Similarly, independent organizations such as the Aero-
space Medical Association, have issued policies and guidelines taking
into consideration not just the physical health of SOs but also their
mental health49. There are not only expansive rules and guidelines at
the selection and annual re-evaluation stage for astronauts, but also
stringent health monitoring before, during, and after spaceﬂight50.
However, with increasing commercial and private spaceﬂight oppor-
tunities, it is no longer just trained and pre-screened astronauts who
travel to space. Since existing guidance in its various forms applies
mostly to government-sponsored or -employed professional astro-
nauts, the question arises as to who determines whether the potential
health risks associated with spaceﬂight are acceptable or not in the
case of SOs.
Current guidance on its own is not in a good position to resolve
some of the issues that will arise in these new contexts. Both medical
and scientiﬁc research communities as well as a number of govern-
ments have long and carefully deliberated about medical and ethical
scenarios and questions that might arise during spaceﬂight. However,
while some of their guidelines might apply to certain instances of, say,
paying SOs (for example, private astronauts travelling to the ISS and
therefore covered by ISS rules), there is still a relative dearth of dis-
cussion concerning how to extend these important deliberations to
the new types of SO that we are likely to see in the coming decades.
Moreover, since existing law and policy frameworks were
designed mostly with government-employed or -sponsored astronauts
in mind, their scope does not always extend neatly to their non-
governmental counterparts. For instance, federal space agencies form
an employer-employee relationship with their astronauts. While this
might be applicable to some kinds of potential commercial SOs, it will
not be applicable to private SOs. For example, while the International
Commission on Radiological Protection stresses the importance of
radiological protection, in the U.S. the National Council on Radiation
Protection and Measurements (NCRP)51 explicitly states that its pur-
view is “NASA selection of astronauts for participation in space mis-
sions” and that “the measures suggested in this Report may be unique
to NASA and not generalizable”. Although the reﬁnements proposed
by the NCRP to NASA’s shared decision-making framework do not
directly pertain to commercial and private SOs, their relevance is evi-
dent and should be taken into consideration.
One might think that general documents of medical research
ethics could provide some help here. For example, the World Medical
Association’s (WMA) “Declaration of Helsinki” (DoH)52 is one of the
most inﬂuential and important sets of ethical principles concerning
medical research involving human subjects. While the WMA has no
formal authority or binding status, it is still often expected that
guidelines concerning research ethics will look to the DoH as a guiding
document. However, the DoH is neither accepted by all countries nor
uncontroversial. For example, Schüklenk and Ashcroft53 have high-
lighted both the “absence of a consensus over the actual content of the
Declaration and its status”, and stressed its “continuing lack of a ser-
ious consultation with the relevant stakeholders”, while also empha-
sizing
the
more
general
“absence
of
a
consensus
among
knowledgeable, well-intentioned bioethicists, scientists and political
activists over the central issue of research ethics standards”. There is
also a heated debate about whether there exists an international
consensus opinion that violates and diverges from the DoH’s
principles54,55. Macklin has argued that, even with revisions, the DoH
“cannot resolve ongoing controversies”, since “it simply does not
address other aspects of international research about which people
disagree”56. Macklin has further stressed conﬂicts between the DoH
and “ofﬁcial regulations promulgated by a federal agency, with
enforcement mechanisms and sanctions for noncompliance” and
pointed out that “it is hardly surprising that researchers, ethical review
bodies, and governmental agencies do not consider the Declaration of
Helsinki to be a necessary adjunct to the “ofﬁcial” CommonRule, which
governs most federally funded research in the United States”56. Indeed,
the US FDA ﬁrst rejected the 2000 and later revisions, before elim-
inating all references to the DoH in 200657. The situation is not dis-
similar in many other countries and regions. Documents such as the
Altered 
microbiome 
composition
Mitochondrial 
dysregulation
Epigenetic
changes
Oxidative 
stress
Telomeric length
changes
DNA
damage
Cardiovascular
changes
CNS alteration
Musculoskeletal
changes
Immune system
dysfunction
Altered 
circadian
rhythm
Increased 
cancer risk
Fig. 2 | Biological and Health Features of Spaceﬂight. Space hazards, as outlined
in Fig. 1, drive a diverse array of molecular and cellular changes observed during
spaceﬂight, including DNA damage, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysregulation,
alteration in the microbiome composition, epigenetic changes, and telomere
length changes. Such features will have the potential to induce pathophysiologic
system changes affecting the central nervous system, the cardiovascular system,
immune functions, musculoskeletal dynamics, the circadian rhythm, and cancer
risk in SOs.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
3

DoH – regardless of its controversies – are much too general to resolve
particular ethical conundrums related to human space travel. Thus,
while they might provide some necessary restrictions and sometimes
even positive guidance, the question of how such general principles
apply to speciﬁc and concrete cases, especially when there is little
precedent, requires further examination. This of course is just one
reason why agencies around the world spend enormous efforts on
crafting guidelines and recommendations about the ethics of human
subject research in space. But who will do the same for those space
travelers to whom these do not apply?
The relevant international legal framework, i.e. the ﬁve UN Space
Treaties, do not speciﬁcally address the health of astronauts or other
spaceﬂight participants6. The Outer Space Treaty (OST) of 1967
introduces the concept of “envoys of mankind” for astronauts58; the
Rescue and Return Agreement (RRA) extends this protection to “per-
sonnel of spacecraft”. However, neither of these terms is clearly
deﬁned and terminological inconsistencies have led to a broad inter-
pretation, suggesting that the Agreement extends to human life in
outer space or spaceﬂight generally, covering both professional and
non-professional space travelers, including tourists. However, these
agreements were drafted at a time when activities such as space
tourism were unforeseen, posing challenges in predicting and reg-
ulating health concerns for modern space activities. Thus, these
agreements lack explicit health regulations for individuals that are part
of the private space industry and, even if such regulations existed,
enforcing them would be challenging due to the absence of robust
enforcement mechanisms in international law.
To address issues such as these at the US-level, the FAA59 and
NASA entered a Memorandum of Understanding in June 2012, to
coordinate standards for commercial government or non-government
astronaut transport to and from Low Earth Orbit and the ISS. The goal
was to foster both public and crew safety, avoid conﬂicting rules and
guidelines, as well as to provide a framework for the American space
industry. Despite this, the clearance of ‘ordinary’ SOs for spaceﬂight is
currently the responsibility of commercial providers, with limited
oversight, and a lack of standardized screening procedures and
protocols60. The US is currently the main country providing such
guidance in the form of the FAA Recommended Practices for Human
Space Flight Occupant Safety. However, due to the limits of FAA jur-
isdiction, these guidelines only apply to launch and reentry61. Further,
the FAA guidance comes not in the form of mandatory requirements
but rather as (minimal) recommendations, suggesting merely that “[p]
roximate to ﬂight, the operator should require each space ﬂight par-
ticipant to consult with a physician, trained or experienced in aero-
space medicine, to ascertain their personal medical risks from the
space ﬂight proﬁle and vehicle” (2023: B. 4.4.2). It also explicitly states
that “[t]his document does not include any speciﬁc medical criteria
that would limit who should ﬂy in space as a space ﬂight participant.”
(2023: A. 6.1). Thus, given that medical consultation is only a recom-
mendation, in principle anyone capable of giving written informed
consent can ﬂy, regardless of their health proﬁle, as long as they meet
speciﬁed spaceﬂight operator criteria (Fig. 3). This raises a number of
issues.
First, if an SO fails to be cleared by one physician, can they get
clearance from a more lenient provider elsewhere?62 As Langston
points out, “[m]edical forum shopping is a foreseeable ethical and legal
concern where regulatory standardization is lacking or is inconsistent
between jurisdictions… [which] could lead to increased risk of harm
for the individual (in-ﬂight/post-ﬂight), spaceﬂight and crew, as well as
uninvolved third parties”63. This scenario parallels a situation seen in
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration64, where a disqualiﬁed
driver can apply for a resolution if a disagreement exists in regard to
the medical qualiﬁcation exam. However, to oversee potential medical
forum shopping, all results from medical examinations have to be
entered into the centralized National Registry, preventing the con-
tinued medical examination until a desired result is achieved and
certiﬁed.
Second, there might be tension between the potential clearance
requirements desirable for a commercial spaceﬂight operator or pro-
vider – who might have an interest in lenient requirements to sell as
many seats as possible to the limited pool of individuals who can afford
them – and those desirable from the health standpoint of a particular
SO. One might argue that SOs should undergo relevant medical con-
sultations and decide on the risks they are willing to take, similar to
making choices about risky adventures on Earth. So why should they
not be in a position to make similar decisions for space? Nonetheless,
Variable Health Status
Stringent astronaut 
selection criteria as defined 
by NASA / ESA / JAXA
Less defined selection 
criteria for commercial 
space travelers
Stringent government-driven selection criteria vs. minimal oversight for private SOs 
Established policies and ethical guidelines vs. lack of comprehensive regulations
Regulatory framework for astronaut health vs. uncertainties and inconsistencies in SOs' health assessments
Fig. 3 | Differential Approaches to Selecting SOs. Stringent selection criteria
(green) for government-sponsored astronauts (i.e., NASA, ESA, JAXA), including a
hard stop mechanism are depicted on the right of the schematic (right dashed red
line). Less deﬁned commercial space traveler criteria for civilians (red) ﬁnally
leading to rejection (left dashed red line) are indicated. The green-red color-coded
middle area symbolizes the health-related risks, where the array of potential
commercial space selection criteria is located.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
4

while legal and social norms allow people to engage in some risks, the
same norms do not give blanket allowance for people to do anything
they want, instead exercising various degrees of paternalistic oversight
both in people’s private and public lives (for an overview of paternal-
ism and its issues, see Dworkin 2020)65. For example, many govern-
ments require drivers and passengers to wear seatbelts, they require
motorcyclists to wear helmets, forbid the sale of certain drugs, they
forbid people to enter into certain kinds of contracts (for selling
organs, gambling debts, etc.). Questions thus arise about the appro-
priate degree of paternalistic oversight for space travel, as well as
questions about who has the power to enforce relevant policies and
regulations. A further complication – and again one that speaks in
favor of increased guidance or regulation – is that compromised SO
health might also affect fellow passengers. In fact, the September 2023
revisions of the FAA recommendations now recognize this problem at
least partially, stating that “[m]edical consultation for space ﬂight
participants is recommended … to help prevent them from endan-
gering other occupants …. [and] commercial operators will be chal-
lenged to control hazards to space ﬂight participants from other space
ﬂight participants with medical conditions.”61 This is, of course, also a
problem with respect to various forms of ground and air transporta-
tion; however, it is exacerbated in the case of space travel. For one,
providing assistance in space is more difﬁcult than on the ground or in
the air, thus putting fellow travelers in a position in which they are
more likely to compromise their own safety during the course of
providing help, especially in the absence of mandatory training. Fur-
ther, space travel has inherent limits about the amount and kind of
medical equipment that can be transported and effectively used in a
spaceﬂight environment.
Third, even if stringent screening requirements are in place,
substantial uncertainties remain regarding the various health con-
sequences of space travel, making it virtually impossible for speciﬁc
individuals to understand what their actual health risks are, even if
advised by someone “trained or experienced in aerospace medicine”61.
Current data insufﬁciently address individual differences among
astronauts such as age, sex, and genetic background66, which trans-
lates into signiﬁcant uncertainty in predicting individualized space
radiation hazards and outcomes for both astronauts and SOs67. In
addition, while it is known that individuals metabolize drugs and
supplements differently in space68–70, little to nothing is known about
the physiology underlying these changes. Limited available data70
suggests that even relatively common prescription drugs might work
differently in space. Furthermore, the reduced and often unknown
stability of pharmacologic ingredients and supplements over the
course of exploration-rated space missions becomes even more
critical70. Specially prepared space medications, appropriate repacka-
ging to improve pharmaceutical stability, and more insight into indi-
vidual pharmacokinetics are needed to supply both astronauts and
SOs with effective pharmaceuticals and/or other treatment options.
All of these considerations strongly suggest that some guidance
and/or oversight with respect to potential SO screening and clearance
would be highly beneﬁcial (Fig. 3). In fact, this is not just so for the SOs,
but also for the commercial providers who agree to transport them.
While SOs are currently required to sign liability waivers, the legal
status of these waivers is unclear, and so binding rules might also
provide a way for providers to indemnify themselves against future
lawsuits71. However, such rules should be sensitive to the diversity and
variety of potential spaceﬂight endeavors: there is a difference
between a private citizen enjoying a suborbital ﬂight and a commercial
crew member spending prolonged time in space for research pur-
poses, perhaps on a commercial space station.
Human subject research
As our technical and research abilities evolve, so do the ethical con-
siderations for using human subjects for research. While NASA
estimated the chance of survival of the ﬁrst mission to the Moon
(Apollo 8) at 50-50, such odds for harm would not be accepted for any
present-day study involving human subjects (recollection quoted from
Ref. 72). NASA’s ethical principles are deﬁned to ensure human
research subject welfare and minimize health risks. Further, research
protocols can be implemented only if a risk/beneﬁt analysis demon-
strates that the risks to the subjects are reasonable in relation to the
anticipated beneﬁts and the expected importance of new knowledge.
This will become even more important for missions to Mars73. In
addition to the prevention of direct harm, other important con-
siderations include protecting privacy, ensuring strict data security,
and maximizing the positive social impacts of research.
Human Subject Research projects in space, supported or other-
wise subject to regulation by any US federal department or agency, are
strictly regulated under the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR pt
123069). Based on this, the implementation, procedures, and
requirements to conduct space-related research involving human
subjects is tightly controlled within a binding framework. NASA Insti-
tutional Review Board (IRB) committees review such research propo-
sals to guarantee enforcement of these policies and the ethical, safe,
and equitable treatment of human research subjects. In addition, the
Ofﬁce of Research Assurance ensures that all activities comply with
applicable federal regulations and guidelines, ensuring that human
subject welfare and minimal health risk are prioritized for all decisions.
Such analysis will not take into account potential long-term effects on
public policies. An interesting variation from non-NASA research pro-
tocols is the requirement that the responsible ﬂight surgeon maintains
the duty to intervene and terminate ongoing research if the health and
welfare of astronaut research subjects is in question.
While the NASA IRB process adheres to standard practices for
IRBs, it has unique aspects focused on human subjects’ well-being
beyond typical standards. The highest level of concern involves human
subject research studies involving genetic testing. NASA deﬁnes
genetic testing based on the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination
Act74. Studies involving genetic testing in human subjects are deemed
of the highest concern and automatically categorized as “greater than
minimal risk”, according to NASA75. These studies require additional
measures to protect the research subjects, including policies that
prohibit the public release of genetic data without prior approval from
the individual or their direct family members, in accordance with NASA
policy. NASA enforces strict rules as genetic data must be stored
separately, and cross-referencing is forbidden without IRB approval.
After genetic testing, all electronic data is deleted and given solely to
NASA. However, commercial institutions or providers using services at
NASA facilities to launch a space vehicle do not have to adhere to such
rules in the same way.
While the above-described scenarios are focused on NASA, the
processes for international ISS partner research are not demon-
strating signiﬁcant national differences. In general, plans for research
involving human research subjects are carefully examined by the
ethics committee of the researcher’s university or institute, the space
agency proposing the research, and the space agency of the astro-
naut subject. Furthermore, the Human Research Multilateral Review
Board (HRMRB), comprising the representatives of space agencies
involved in the ISS (NASA, ESA, CSA, JAXA), is tasked with investi-
gating and reviewing ethical matters on the ISS. For all research
conducted on an astronaut, the HRMRB looks at whether the safety
and health of the astronaut are assured and whether the appropriate
ethical considerations have been made. As necessary, the HRMRB
then issues recommendations or modiﬁcation requests. While
government-sponsored human subject research is strictly regulated,
it is still unclear whether future commercial SOs will be covered
under such regulations, or if adherence to government regulations
needs to be amended to reﬂect the new reality of space human
subject research.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
5

Ethical considerations
To date, our knowledge regarding the effects of spaceﬂight on
humans, as well as the efﬁcacy and safety of select medical interven-
tions and pharmaceuticals in space, comes from government-
sponsored missions, a small number of astronauts, and, more
recently, civilians (Inspiration4, MS-20, Axiom-1)76,77. Increasing this
type of knowledge is vital to ensuring the safety of future astronauts
and SOs, especially considering the limited opportunities for medical
treatment in space. It is therefore likely that astronauts and SOs will
need to monitor, diagnose, and treat themselves at least part of the
time. Increased commercial and private spaceﬂight opportunities will
bring with them an expanding diversity of SOs with different health
proﬁles, most of them likely not in the same physical and psychological
shape as highly trained career astronauts78–80. By necessity, increasing
knowledge about the effects of the spaceﬂight environment on human
molecular biology, physiology, and psychology, as well as on the
chemical composition of pharmaceuticals, involves human subject
research. With the success of the recent Inspiration4 mission in
deﬁning a wide range of biomedical data, the role of commercial and
private SOs in such research is likely to increase.
As
previously
outlined,
government-sponsored
spaceﬂights
adhere to stringent criteria with respect to human subject research,
through their respective IRBs, ethics committees, and groups. In the
case of Inspiration4, research was conducted through Weill Cornell
Medicine, the Translational Research Institute for Space Health of the
Baylor College of Medicine81, California Institute of Technology, and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and underwent similarly rig-
orous approval processes82. As the general standard for human subject
research requires compliance with ethics approvals, it is expected that
commercial spaceﬂight-based human subject research will continue to
follow these and other applicable internationally ratiﬁed pro-
cesses (Fig. 4).
However, commercial spaceﬂight also raises new ethical issues. In
the past, human subject research in space was mostly a secondary
concern of overall missions whereas now missions are increasingly
conducted explicitly for this purpose. Ethical recruitment for biome-
dical
research
requires
informed
consent.
For
space
travel,
this requires participants to have a good understanding of the space
environment, the nature of associated environmental hazards, as well
as the potential side effects of any drugs under study51. But to what
extent is such consent really possible with respect to space travel?83
Exposure to high radiation, microgravity, and galactic rays may com-
promise participant safety in a number of unknown ways. Further, the
effect of radiation and other extra-terrestrial factors on the chemical
composition of pharmaceutical ingredients is largely unknown, thus
making it especially difﬁcult to inform potential subjects about likely
side effects. The US Code of Regulations for informed consent requires
a “description of any reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts to the
subject” (Title 45, A.A. Part 46.116, b282). In the case of space travel,
where many or most risks are unknown, it is unclear to what extent – if
at all – this requirement can be met. Thus, there is a need to incor-
porate new and emerging ethical issues into existing frameworks in
ways that are based on the same underlying ethical principles that gave
rise to these and similar regulations in the ﬁrst place and that are
applicable to space travel. This is all the more urgent since civilians are
already involved in such research51. Note also that the aforementioned
problems are exacerbated for non-astronaut SOs: most of the existing
data is not from a random population, but rather from an elite force
Fig. 4 | Human Subject Research Ethical and Operational Guidelines. A sche-
matic for the ethical framework for space human subject research. This framework
deﬁnes the key existing principles and regulations that currently exist in human
research (in blue), the implementation of these ethical standards in the clinic and
research laboratory (in yellow), and the challenges that should be considered and
will arise for human research in space (in orange).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
6

markedly dissimilar to average citizens in terms of training, age, health,
and biomedical and behavioral proﬁles. Additionally, it has been
established that even highly trained individuals respond quite differ-
ently to the zero-gravity environment84. Moreover, existing research
was conducted on a population with a high degree of sex, gender, and
ethnic homogeneity and relatively low diversity. Currently, it is
therefore unclear to what extent this research generalizes to SOs
beyond the relatively narrow population that has been studied so far.
Furthermore, principles of health ethics encompass avoiding
harm,
beneﬁcence,
achieving
a
favorable
risk-beneﬁt
balance,
respecting autonomy, fairness, and ﬁdelity85. Terrestrial clinical trials
rely on large participant numbers, secure drug storage, and timely
sample collection, which are difﬁcult to replicate in space. How to
ensure compliance with these principles in space thus remains
uncertain. There are also some concerns about individual principles:
For example, human subject research in space may violate a partici-
pant’s autonomy, should the individual decide to withdraw from the
study. In terrestrial medical research, subjects may at any time with-
draw their consent, even if the study is already in progress. Such
withdrawal, however, is much more complicated in space. Even if
individuals are able to drop out, return to Earth will not be immediate.
There is also no way for individuals to withdraw from the possible
(unknown) long-term effects of the spaceﬂight environment, and any
consent thus involves not just consent to the study itself, but consent
to any future effects that might result from spaceﬂight activities. This
might also lead to violating the Avoiding Harm principle, since
remaining in space is unhealthy for participants, especially if the
desired withdrawal occurs as the result of unforeseen health problems.
In turn, these conditions might then violate the Favorable Risk and
Beneﬁt Balance, due to the changing circumstances during the course
of research. In NASA’s case, the responsible ﬂight surgeon can inter-
rupt trials. However, in the absence of ofﬁcial, government-sanctioned
ﬂight surgeons with extensive spaceﬂight experience, who assumes
the equivalent responsibilities for SO healthcare, ensuring subjects’
best interests are met?
These problems represent only a small subset of issues, demon-
strating the urgent need for guidance on non-government space
research on human subjects (for further issues relating to privacy and
behavioral health, see86,87). Such research should follow strict ethics
committee review and otherwise meet the same stringent standards
that NASA, ESA, and JAXA currently adhere to88, including following
suggestions by international medical research bodies, such as the DoH,
The Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences’
International Ethical Guidelines for Health-Related Research Involving
Humans89, and others.
Conclusion
We are entering an exciting new era of space exploration previously
only thought of as science ﬁction. Commercial/private and civilian
spaceﬂights, such as Inspiration4 and the Polaris missions are no
longer just a possibility but a reality. Exciting as these opportunities
are, they also come with the burden of ensuring that future space
travel will be as safe and ethical as possible. While governmental
oversight has historically governed space activities, the emergence of
non-governmental initiatives calls for uniﬁed ethical guidelines, safe-
guarding human well-being during selection, research, and decision-
making in space. Since non-governmental outﬁts are not bound by the
same rules in the same way, we as a community must ensure that the
guidelines we set will guide space exploration according to the highest
ethical and medical standards for humans that are currently possible,
including selection of SOs, medical research ranging from human
subject research to discussion of in-ﬂight triage decisions. The added
difﬁculties of non-universal terminology referring to different kinds of
space travelers and of making guidelines sensitive to the diversity and
variety of potential spaceﬂight endeavors will add further layers of
complexity. The earlier and better any such guidelines can be imple-
mented, the better the chances that space travel can be performed
according to the safest and most optimal standards.
References
1.
Inspiration4 - Home. Inspiration4 https://inspiration4.com,
https://inspiration4.com.
2.
NASA Selects First Commercial Destination Module for International
Space Station - NASA. https://www.nasa.gov/news-release/nasa-
selects-ﬁrst-commercial-destination-module-for-international-
space-station/.
3.
Available Flight Platforms - NASA. https://www.nasa.gov/stmd-
ﬂight-opportunities/available-ﬂight-platforms/.
4.
Falcon 9: First Orbital Class Rocket Capable of Reﬂight. SpaceX
https://www.spacex.com/vehicles/falcon-9/.
5.
Rep. Akaka, D. K. [D-H.−2. H.R.3942 −98th Congress (1983-1984):
Commercial Space Launch Act. https://www.congress.gov/bill/
98th-congress/house-bill/3942 (1984).
6.
United Nations Ofﬁce for Outer Space Affairs. United Nations
Treaties and Principles on Outer Space. Doc. Outer Space
Law (2008).
7.
Meet the dearMoon Crew! Meet the dearMoon Crew! https://
dearmoon.earth/.
8.
Polaris Program. Polaris Program https://polarisprogram.com/.
9.
Kluge, G. et al. Commercial suborbital space tourism-proposal on
passenger’s medical selection. Acta Astronaut. 92, 187–192 (2013).
10.
Arnould, J. Icarus’ Second Chance: The Basis and Perspectives of
Space Ethics. vol. 6 (Springer, 2011).
11.
Coleman, D. S. & Miller, C. D. L. Military Space Ethics. (Howgate
Publishing Limited, 2022).
12.
Galliott, J. Commercial Space Exploration: Ethics, Policy and Gov-
ernance. (Routledge, 2016). https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315572857.
13.
Green, B. Space Ethics. (Rowman & Littleﬁeld, 2021).
14.
Schwartz, J. S. J. & Milligan, T. The Ethics of Space Exploration.
(Springer, 2016).
15.
Steer, C. & Hersch, M. War and Peace in Outer Space: Law, Policy,
and Ethics. (Oxford University Press, 2021).
16.
Lawton, A., Wal, Z. van der & Huberts, L. Ethics in Public Policy and
Management: A global research companion. (Routledge, 2015).
17.
Rycroft, M. J. Beyond the International Space Station: The Future of
Human Spaceﬂight: Proceedings of an International Symposium,
4–7 June 2002, Strasbourg, France. (Springer, 2013).
18.
Gibson, T. M. The bioethics of enhancing human performance for
spaceﬂight. J. Med. Ethics 32, 129–132 (2006).
19.
Milligan, T. Nobody Owns the Moon: The Ethics of Space Exploita-
tion. (McFarland & Company, 2015).
20. Cucinotta, F. A., Cacao, E., Kim, M.-H. Y. & Saganti, P. B. Cancer and
circulatory disease risks for a human mission to Mars: Private mis-
sion considerations. Acta Astronaut 166, 529–536 (2020).
21.
NASA Spaceﬂight Human-System Standard Volume 1, Crew Health |
Standards. https://standards.nasa.gov/standard/NASA/NASA-STD-
3001-VOL-1.
22. Langston, S. M. Space Travel: Risk, Ethics, and Governance in
Commercial Human Spaceﬂight. N. Space 4, 83–97 (2016).
23. Langston, S. M. Commercial space travel understanding the legal,
ethical and medical implications for commercial spaceﬂight parti-
cipants and crew. in 2017 8th International Conference on Recent
Advances in Space Technologies (RAST) 489–494 https://doi.org/
10.1109/RAST.2017.8002956 (2017).
24. 14 C. F. R. Part 460 -- Human Space Flight Requirements. https://
www.ecfr.gov/current/title-14/part-460.
25. Nelson, G. A. Space radiation and human exposures, a primer.
Radiat. Res. 185, 349–358 (2016).
26. Demontis, G. C. et al. Human pathophysiological adaptations to the
space environment. Front. Physiol. 8, 547 (2017).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
7

27.
Pagel, J. I. & Choukèr, A. Effects of isolation and conﬁnement on
humans-implications for manned space explorations. J. Appl. Phy-
siol. 120, 1449–1457 (2016).
28. Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental biological features of space-
ﬂight: advancing the ﬁeld to enable deep-space exploration. Cell
183, 1162–1184 (2020).
29. Space Radiation and Astronaut Health: Managing and Commu-
nicating Cancer Risks. (National Academies Press, 2021). https://doi.
org/10.17226/26155.
30. Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA twins study: a multi-
dimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science
364, eaau8650 (2019).
31.
Voorhies, A. A. et al. Study of the impact of long-duration space
missions at the International Space Station on the astronaut
microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 9911 (2019).
32. da Silveira, W. A. et al. Comprehensive multi-omics analysis reveals
mitochondrial stress as a central biological hub for spaceﬂight
impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201 e20 (2020).
33. Goodwin, T. J. & Christoﬁdou-Solomidou, M. Oxidative stress and
space biology: an organ-based approach. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19,
959 (2018).
34. Gertz, M. L. et al. Multi-omic, single-cell, and biochemical proﬁles of
astronauts guide pharmacological strategies for returning to grav-
ity. Cell Rep. 33, 108429 (2020).
35. Patel, S. The effects of microgravity and space radiation on cardi-
ovascular health: From low-Earth orbit and beyond. Int. J. Cardiol.
Heart Vasc. 30, 100595 (2020).
36. Ricci, F., De Caterina, R. & Fedorowski, A. Orthostatic Hypotension:
Epidemiology, Prognosis, and Treatment. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 66,
848–860 (2015).
37. van Loon, L. M., Steins, A., Schulte, K.-M., Gruen, R. & Tucker, E. M.
Computational modeling of orthostatic intolerance for travel to
Mars. Npj Microgravity 8, 1–10 (2022).
38. Auñón-Chancellor, S. M., Pattarini, J. M., Moll, S. & Sargsyan, A.
Venous Thrombosis during Spaceﬂight. N. Engl. J. Med. 382,
89–90 (2020).
39. Marshall-Goebel, K. et al. Assessment of jugular venous blood ﬂow
stasis and thrombosis during spaceﬂight. JAMA Netw. Open 2,
e1915011 (2019).
40. Prasad, B. et al. Inﬂuence of microgravity on apoptosis in cells,
tissues, and other systems in vivo and in vitro. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21,
9373 (2020).
41.
Grimm, D. et al. The impact of microgravity on bone in humans.
Bone 87, 44–56 (2016).
42. Orwoll, E. S. et al. Skeletal health in long-duration astronauts: nat-
ure, assessment, and management recommendations from the
NASA Bone. Summit J. Bone Miner. Res. J. Am. Soc. Bone Miner. Res.
28, 1243–1255 (2013).
43. Lee, A. G. et al. Spaceﬂight associated neuro-ocular syndrome
(SANS) and the neuro-ophthalmologic effects of microgravity: a
review and an update. Npj Microgravity 6, 1–10 (2020).
44. Patel, Z. S. et al. Red risks for a journey to the red planet: the highest
priority human health risks for a mission to Mars. Npj Microgravity 6,
1–13 (2020).
45. Guo, Z., Zhou, G. & Hu, W. Carcinogenesis induced by space
radiation: a systematic review. Neoplasia N. Y. N. 32, 100828
(2022).
46. Costes, S. V., Chiolo, I., Pluth, J. M., Barcellos-Hoff, M. H. & Jakob, B.
Spatiotemporal characterization of ionizing radiation induced DNA
damage foci and their relation to chromatin organization. Mutat.
Res. 704, 78–87 (2010).
47. Bogomolov, V. V. et al. International space Station medical stan-
dards and certiﬁcation for space ﬂight participants. Aviat. Space
Environ. Med. 78, 1162–1169 (2007).
48. Garcia, A. M. Multilateral Coordination Board Joint Statement.
https://blogs.nasa.gov/spacestation/2022/08/10/multilateral-
coordination-board-joint-statement/ (2022).
49. Aerospace medical association commercial spaceﬂight working
group. Suborbital commercial spaceﬂight crewmember medical
issues. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 82, 475–484 (2011).
50. Zheng, M. et al. Time-resolved molecular measurements reveal
changes in astronauts during spaceﬂight. Front. Physiol. 14,
1219221 (2023).
51.
Brooks, A. et al. Report No. 167 – Potential Impact of Individual
Genetic Susceptibility and Previous Radiation Exposure on Radiation
Risk for Astronauts (2010) - NCRP | Bethesda, MD. https://
ncrponline.org/shop/reports/report-no-167-potential-impact-of-
individual-genetic-susceptibility-and-previous-radiation-exposure-
on-radiation-risk-for-astronauts/ (2018).
52. WMA - The world medical association-declaration of helsinki. https://
www.wma.net/what-we-do/medical-ethics/declaration-of-helsinki/.
53. Schücklenk, U. & Ashcroft, R. International research ethics.
Bioethics 14, 158–172 (2000).
54. Lie, R. K., Emanuel, E., Grady, C. & Wendler, D. The standard of care
debate: the Declaration of Helsinki versus the international con-
sensus opinion. J. Med. Ethics 30, 190–193 (2004).
55. Schüklenk, U. The standard of care debate: against the myth of an
“international consensus opinion”. J. Med. Ethics 30,
194–197 (2004).
56. Macklin, R. After Helsinki: unresolved issues in international
research. Kennedy Inst. Ethics J. 11, 17–36 (2001).
57. Wolinsky, H. The battle of Helsinki: Two troublesome paragraphs in
the Declaration of Helsinki are causing a furore over medical
research ethics. EMBO Rep. 7, 670–672 (2006).
58. Outer Space Treaty. https://www.unoosa.org/oosa/en/ourwork/
spacelaw/treaties/outerspacetreaty.html.
59. Pace, S. Alternative futures for crewed space cooperation after the
international space station. J. Space Saf. Eng. 10, 88–94 (2023).
60. Crowther, R. The regulatory challenges of ensuring commercial
human spaceﬂight safety. Space Policy 27, 74–76 (2011).
61.
Federal aviation administration. Recommended Practices for
Human Space Flight Occupant Safety - Version 2.0. 102 https://
www.faa.gov/media/71481 (2023).
62. Grenon, S. M., Saary, J., Gray, G., Vanderploeg, J. M. & Hughes-
Fulford, M. Can I take a space ﬂight? Considerations for doctors.
BMJ 345, e8124 (2012).
63. Langston, S. Reimagining Icarus: Ethics, law and policy considera-
tions for commercial human spaceﬂight. Space Journey Hum.
Adapt Live Microgravity https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.74716
(2018).
64. 49 CFR 391.47 -- Resolution of conﬂicts of medical evaluation.
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-49/part-391/section-391.47.
65. Dworkin, G. Paternalism. in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(2002).
66. Locke, P. A. & Weil, M. M. Personalized cancer risk assessments for
space radiation exposures. Front. Oncol. 6, 38 (2016).
67. Rosenfeld, J. A., Mason, C. E. & Smith, T. M. Limitations of the human
reference genome for personalized genomics. PLOS ONE 7,
e40294 (2012).
68. Putcha, L., Berens, K. L., Marshburn, T. H., Ortega, H. J. & Billica, R. D.
Pharmaceutical use by U.S. astronauts on space shuttle missions.
Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 70, 705–708 (1999).
69. Barger, L. K. et al. Prevalence of sleep deﬁciency and use of hyp-
notic drugs in astronauts before, during, and after spaceﬂight: an
observational study. Lancet Neurol. 13, 904–912 (2014).
70. Blue, R. S. et al. Supplying a pharmacy for NASA exploration
spaceﬂight: challenges and current understanding. Npj Micro-
gravity 5, 1–12 (2019).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
8

71.
Langston, S. M. Suborbital Flights: a comparative analysis of
national and international law. J. Space Law 37, 299 (2011).
72.
Kluger, J. Apollo 8: The Thrilling Story of the First Mission to the
Moon. (Henry Holt and Co., 2017).
73. Nangle, S. N. et al. The case for biotech on Mars. Nat. Biotechnol. 38,
401–407 (2020).
74. The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008. US EEOC
https://www.eeoc.gov/statutes/genetic-information-nondiscrim
ination-act-2008.
75. NASA Policy Directive - Use of Human Research Genetic Testing.
https://nodis3.gsfc.nasa.gov/displayDir.cfm?t=NPD&c=7170&s=1
(2017).
76. Pagnini, F. et al. Human behavior and performance in deep space
exploration: next challenges and research gaps. NPJ Microgravity 9,
27 (2023).
77.
Sishc, B. J. et al. The need for biological countermeasures to miti-
gate the risk of space radiation-induced carcinogenesis, cardio-
vascular disease, and central nervous system deﬁciencies. Life Sci.
Space Res 35, 4–8 (2022).
78. Blue, R. S., Jennings, R. T., Antunano, M. J. & Mathers, C. H. Com-
mercial spaceﬂight: progress and challenges in expanding human
access to space. REACH 7–8, 6–13 (2017).
79. Jennings, R. T. et al. Medical qualiﬁcation of a commercial space-
ﬂight participant: not your average astronaut. Aviat. Space Environ.
Med. 77, 475–484 (2006).
80. Barratt, M. R. Comments on medical qualiﬁcation of space tourists.
Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 77, 485 (2006).
81.
Bokhari, R. S. et al. Looking on the horizon; potential and unique
approaches to developing radiation countermeasures for deep
space travel. Life Sci. Space Res 35, 105–112 (2022).
82. Federal policy for the protection of human subjects. Federal Reg-
ister https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/01/19/
2017-01058/federal-policy-for-the-protection-of-human-
subjects (2017).
83. Marsh, M. Ethical and medical dilemmas of space tourism. Adv.
Space Res. 37, 1823–1827 (2006).
84. Pavez Loriè, E. et al. The future of personalized medicine in space:
from observations to countermeasures. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol.
9, 739747 (2021).
85. Health Standards for Long Duration and Exploration Spaceﬂight:
Ethics Principles, Responsibilities, and Decision Framework.
(National Academies Press, 2014). https://doi.org/10.17226/18576.
86. Ritsher, J., Kanas, N. & Saylor, S. Maintaining Privacy During Psy-
chosocial Research on the International Space Station. J. Hum.
Perform. Extreme Environ. 8, Article 3 (2005).
87. Reed, R. D. & Antonsen, E. L. Should NASA Collect Astronauts’
Genetic Information for Occupational Surveillance and Research?
AMA J. Ethics 20, 849–856 (2018).
88. NASA Guidelines for Promoting Scientiﬁc and Research Integrity.
https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/atoms/ﬁles/nasa_
guidelines_for_promoting_scientiﬁc_and_research_integrity-july_
2018.pdf (2018).
89. Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences
(CIOMS). 2016 International ethical guidelines for health-related
research involving humans. (Geneva, 2016).
Acknowledgements
We thank Diana Lim for the preparation of the ﬁgures, critical comments,
and consultation regarding the effective display of the images. The
preparation of this manuscript was supported by the National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration (NASA, Space Biology
80NSSC22K0255 to HS). CEM thanks the WorldQuant Foundation,
NASA (NNX14AH50G, NNX17AB26G, 80NSSC22K0254,
NNH18ZTT001N-FG2), the National Institutes of Health (R01MH117406,
P01CA214274 R01CA249054), and the LLS (MCL7001-18, LLS 9238-16,
7029-23). NS was supported by grants from NASA [NSSC22K0250;
NSSC22K0278]. A.B. was supported by NASA grant 16-ROSBFP_GL-
0005: NNH16ZTT001N-FG Appendix G: Solicitation of Proposals for
Flight and Ground Space Biology Research (Award Number:
80NSSC19K0883) and The Translational Research Institute for Space
Health through NASA Cooperative Agreement NNX16AO69A (T-0404).
The material contained in this document is based upon work supported
by a National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) grant or
cooperative agreement. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions, or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are those of the author and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of NASA.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: A.B., D.T., C.E.M., and H.S.; Investigation: D.T., H.S.,
F.K., A.T., A.S.G., A.B., M.M., and A.S.; Original Draft: D.T., H.S., A.B.,
A.S.G., F.K., A.T., and A.S.; Review & Editing: A.R.I., A.C., J.C., J.B., C.G.,
J.K., K.B.C., S.D., S.A., M.B., C.E.M., C.C., N.S., D.T., H.S., F.K., A.T., A.S.G.,
A.S., M.M., and A.B.; Figures and Visualization: H.S, A.S.G., A.B., C.C.,
N.S., and A.T.; Funding Acquisition: H.S.; Supervision: A.B., D.T., and H.S.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Hansjörg Schwertz, Afshin Beheshti or Dana Tulodziecki.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Volker
Damann, Sara Langston and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their
contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44357-x
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4774 
9
