BRIEF COMMUNICATION
OPEN
Evaluating the effect of spaceﬂight on the host–pathogen
interaction between human intestinal epithelial cells
and Salmonella Typhimurium
Jennifer Barrila
1,2, Shameema F. Sarker2, Nicole Hansmeier3,4, Shanshan Yang5, Kristina Buss5, Natalia Briones5,6, Jin Park5,
Richard R. Davis1,2, Rebecca J. Forsyth2,16, C. Mark Ott7, Kevin Sato8, Cristine Kosnik9, Anthony Yang9, Cheryl Shimoda9, Nicole Rayl8,10,
Diana Ly8, Aaron Landenberger11,16, Stephanie D. Wilson12, Naoko Yamazaki13, Jason Steel5, Camila Montano5, Rolf U. Halden14,
Tom Cannon9, Sarah L. Castro-Wallace7 and Cheryl A. Nickerson
1,2,15✉
Spaceﬂight uniquely alters the physiology of both human cells and microbial pathogens, stimulating cellular and molecular
changes directly relevant to infectious disease. However, the inﬂuence of this environment on host–pathogen interactions remains
poorly understood. Here we report our results from the STL-IMMUNE study ﬂown aboard Space Shuttle mission STS-131, which
investigated multi-omic responses (transcriptomic, proteomic) of human intestinal epithelial cells to infection with Salmonella
Typhimurium when both host and pathogen were simultaneously exposed to spaceﬂight. To our knowledge, this was the ﬁrst
in-ﬂight infection and dual RNA-seq analysis using human cells.
npj Microgravity  (2021) 7:9 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00136-w
Humans will travel to space more frequently and for longer
duration as the rapidly growing spaceﬂight industry enables more
routine access for both professional astronauts and the public.
Spaceﬂight can adversely affect multiple aspects of human
physiology, including immune and gastrointestinal function1–4.
While pre-ﬂight screening and quarantine procedures have
reduced infection incidence, astronauts and cargo can still harbor
opportunistic and obligate pathogens, including Salmonella spp.,
which have been recovered from both crew refuse and Interna-
tional Space Station (ISS) surfaces5–8. We previously discovered
that spaceﬂight and spaceﬂight analog culture increased the
virulence and stress resistance of the foodborne pathogen,
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (Salmonella)9–12. These
environments have also been shown to increase the virulence
and/or alter pathogenesis-related phenotypes of other micro-
organisms13–16. Collectively, these ﬁndings indicate an increased
risk for infection during space travel and underscore the need for
a more in-depth understanding of the similarities and differences
between spaceﬂight and ground-based infection mechanisms.
Studies
performed
in
spaceﬂight
and
spaceﬂight
analog
environments have revealed unexpected physiological responses
in both mammalian and microbial cells14,15. This is not surprising
given that physical forces in the cellular microenvironment
(including those associated with microgravity) profoundly alter
both host and pathogen phenotypes through mechanotransduc-
tion17. An integrated network involving the cytoskeleton, cell
surface receptors, and the extracellular matrix (ECM) mediates the
dynamic three-dimensional (3D) interactions between host cells
and their external environment to regulate cellular responses17–19.
Since spaceﬂight alters the organization and/or expression of
these classes of proteins14,20,21, it is logical to predict that this
environment
could
impact
infection
processes
for
invasive
pathogens like Salmonella that hijack the host and actively exploit
these
structural
networks
to
enable
their
invasion
and
dissemination22,23.
From the pathogen perspective, we previously discovered that
spaceﬂight analog culture of Salmonella in the Rotating Wall
Vessel bioreactor led to increased virulence in mice24, enhanced
stress
resistance9–11,24,
global
transcriptional
and
proteomic
reprogramming11,12,24 and enhanced the colonization of a human
3D intestinal co-culture model (JB, SY, RRD, RJF, CMO, JS, CAN;
manuscript in preparation). Space Shuttle experiments aboard
STS-115 and STS-123 independently conﬁrmed RWV trends by
demonstrating that spaceﬂight increased the virulence and
globally altered the transcriptomic and proteomic responses of
Salmonella relative to identical ground controls9,10. Supplementa-
tion of select ions in the media was able to counteract this
spaceﬂight-associated increased virulence10. It is important to
note that Salmonella virulence studies were performed when the
bacteria were cultured in spaceﬂight, brought back to Earth and
immediately used in animal infections (i.e., the host was not
exposed to spaceﬂight). Transcriptional proﬁling revealed a central
role for the RNA-binding protein Hfq in the response of Salmonella
to both spaceﬂight and spaceﬂight analog culture in the RWV9,10
and subsequent studies indicated altered expression of hfq or the
Hfq regulon in other microbes25–28.
1Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 2Biodesign Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 3Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 4Luther College at University of
Regina, Department of Biology, Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada. 5Bioinformatics Core Facility, Bioscience, Knowledge Enterprise, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
6Integrated Cancer Genomics Division, The Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA. 7Biomedical Research and Environmental Sciences Division, NASA
Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA. 8NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA, USA. 9Tissue Genesis, Inc, Honolulu, HI, USA. 10NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.,
USA. 11DoD Space Test Program, Houston, TX, USA. 12Astronaut Ofﬁce, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA. 13Space Biomedical Research Ofﬁce, Human Space
Technology and Astronauts Department, Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Tokyo, Japan. 14Biodesign Center for Environmental Health Engineering, School of
Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environment, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 15School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 16Deceased:
Rebecca J. Forsyth, Aaron Landenberger. ✉email: Cheryl.Nickerson@asu.edu
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

In this study, we investigated how spaceﬂight culture alters the
response of human intestinal epithelial cells (HT-29) to infection by
Salmonella when both the host and pathogen were exposed to
spaceﬂight. The experiment was ﬂown as part of the Space Tissue
Loss (STL) payload and operationally designated as STL-IMMUNE,
since epithelial cells are excellent sentinels of innate immunity by
providing the ﬁrst physical and chemical barriers to infection and
coordinating additional innate and mucosal defenses and sub-
sequent
adaptive
responses29,30.
Since
in-ﬂight
technical
limitations precluded the use of gentamicin protection assays to
quantify bacterial invasion into the epithelium, we focused our
analysis on transcriptomic (dual RNA-seq of host and pathogen)
and proteomic proﬁling (Isobaric tags for relative and absolute
quantiﬁcation/iTRAQ). These global analyses can yield valuable
insight into the status of healthy and infected cells. Figure 1 shows
the experimental design and timeline for STL-IMMUNE and
schematic of hollow ﬁber bioreactors used for 3D cell culture.
HT-29 cells were seeded into the extracapillary space (ECS) of
Fig. 1
STL-IMMUNE experimental design and impact of spaceﬂight on uninfected HT-29 transcriptional proﬁles. a Hollow ﬁber bioreactor
technology. Photo and cross-sectional schematic of the hollow ﬁber bioreactors used in this study. Hollow ﬁbers had a pore size of 0.3 µm to
retain bacteria within the extracapillary space (ECS) while still facilitating nutrient and gas exchange via diffusion as oxygenated media was
perfused through the intracapillary space (ICS). b STL-IMMUNE experimental design. HT-29 cells and bacteria were prepared as shown (see
“Methods” section for additional detail). Bioreactors, bacteria, and ﬁxative bags were integrated into the CCM hardware and launched aboard
Space Shuttle Discovery mission STS-131. Crew members activated the CCM once on orbit. At mission elapsed day 11, cultures were infected
with S. Typhimurium for 6 h and ﬁxed for postﬂight analysis. Launch and astronaut images: NASA [STS-131-S-036 (image is slightly cropped),
S131E007206, and S131E007188]. c Spaceﬂight-induced transcriptional responses of HT-29 cells relative to ground controls. Left panel:
volcano plot depicting differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between ﬂight and ground control cultures (ﬂight/ground). Red: signiﬁcantly
upregulated genes according to a log2 fold change in expression of at least ± 1 and FDR < 0.05. Blue: signiﬁcantly downregulated genes. The
top 5 signiﬁcantly up and downregulated genes are labeled. Right panel: Analysis of upregulated (red) and downregulated (blue) transcripts
revealed signiﬁcantly enriched GO terms and KEGG pathways using DAVID. BP biological process, CC cellular component. The authors afﬁrm
that informed consent for publication of the images in Fig. 1 was provided.
J. Barrila et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

hollow
ﬁber
bioreactors
which
contained
collagen
I-coated
capillary ﬁbers for intestinal cell attachment. Oxygenated and
CO2-containing media was continually perfused through the
intracapillary space (ICS) of the ﬁbers (underneath the basal side
of the cells, which also prevented exposure of cells to high ﬂuid
shear forces). During spaceﬂight, Salmonella was introduced to the
apical side of HT-29 cultures through ECS ports and allowed to
incubate for 6 h before ﬁxative was perfused through the ICS.
Between uninfected ﬂight and ground HT-29 cultures, RNA-seq
proﬁling showed signiﬁcant differences in 307 genes (≥2-fold
change; false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05; Fig. 1c and Supplemen-
tary Table 1). Evaluation of the top 5 signiﬁcantly upregulated
genes revealed the enhanced expression of several transcripts
belonging to the small proline-rich (SPRR) family as well as DHRS9
(a retinol dehydrogenase) and tumor-associated calcium signal
transducer 2 (Fig. 1c). SPRR genes encode mechanosensitive
proteins that play roles in barrier function, differentiation, reactive
oxygen species (ROS) detoxiﬁcation, wound healing and cancer31.
They are also likely involved in the stabilization of the actin
cytoskeleton in response to biomechanical stress32. Their expres-
sion is regulated by ECM/integrin interactions and by various
stimuli, including UV radiation, inﬂammation, oxidative stress,
DNA damage, and retinoids31,33. Gene ontology (GO) analysis of
upregulated genes indicated enrichment in type I interferon (IFN-I)
signaling/antiviral defense, DNA replication, and differentiation
(including the SPRR genes) (Fig. 1c, Supplementary Table 2). The
upregulation of viral defense genes was also previously observed
in the livers of mice following spaceﬂight34.
IFN-I signaling is complex and context dependent, regulating a
broad range of cellular processes35,36. In addition to modulating
innate and adaptive immune defenses against pathogens, IFN-I
regulates intestinal homeostasis, including epithelial cell prolifera-
tion, and barrier function36,37. IFN-I signaling is often associated
with decreased proliferation to promote differentiation, cellular
repair, or defense against infection36,37. We found that genes
important for glycolysis (SLC2A3, HK2, PFKFB3, PFKFB4, PDK1) and
fatty acid metabolism (FADS1, FADS2, ELOVL5, EHHADH, SIRT4)
were downregulated in ﬂight (Supplementary Table 1). Previous
spaceﬂight studies using either cultured macrophages38 or murine
liver tissue34 also saw the suppression of multiple glycolytic
enzymes, with the latter study postulating a model linking
spaceﬂight changes in cellular metabolism, ROS, and immune
dysregulation34. The downregulation of these bioenergetic path-
ways in our study could indicate the reduced proliferation of the
ﬂight cultures, which could result from a number of phenotypes,
including
decreased
tumorigenicity/increased
differentiation,
increased DNA damage or apoptosis. During cancer metabolism,
glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis is often elevated39. Several
genes highly expressed in tumors or undifferentiated cells were
also downregulated in ﬂight, including CA9, CA12, CEACAM6,
ITGA5, CLDN2, COL5A2, VIM, PROM1, and LGR4 (Supplemental Table
1). Together, these trends may indicate decreased tumorigenicity
of the ﬂight cells. Salmonella is known to preferentially colonize
cancer cells40, thus differences in tumorigenicity between ﬂight
and ground cultures could impact infection. Of relevance, we
previously showed that RWV culture of HT-29 cells induced a more
normal, differentiated phenotype relative to controls41. Although
in our present study we saw indicators of increased differentiation
of the ﬂight cultures, there were also some potential indicators of
increased tumorigenicity (e.g., downregulation of VIL, TP53I11,
upregulation of CCAT1; Supplemental Table 1). In addition, LGR4 is
also important for Paneth cell differentiation42. A reduction in
Paneth cells could diminish antimicrobial defenses. Host metabo-
lism is also important in the context of an impending infection as
the
pathogen
must
scavenge
for
available
nutrients43,44.
Decreases in intracellular glucose could dampen intracellular
pathogen replication depending on the availability of other
nutrients.
However,
Salmonella
has
evolved
an
impressive
metabolic plasticity to exploit diverse nutrients in parallel, even
at trace levels44.
Engagement of IFN-I signaling and decreased expression of
metabolic genes could also indicate increased apoptosis. How-
ever, pro-apoptotic genes BNIP3 and BNIP3L were downregulated
in ﬂight, suggesting reduced apoptosis. A previous spaceﬂight
study45 showed reduced apoptosis and increased differentiation
in MIP-101 colon cells, as well as increased expression of
carcinoembryonic antigen proteins (often upregulated in colon
cancer). In our study, we observed the downregulation of
CEACAM6 (Supplementary Table 1). IFN-I signaling can also be
activated by the DNA damage response following exposure to
radiation, oxidative stress, or other harmful stimuli. DNA damage
can occur during spaceﬂight due to radiation exposure and
oxidative
stress,
including
in
the
gastrointestinal
tract46–49.
Chromosomal damage has been observed in astronauts48,49 and
we previously saw the downregulation of select DNA repair genes
in astronaut blood cells50, which could potentially impede repair.
In our present study, several genes involved in checkpoint-
mediated responses to DNA damage and replication stress were
upregulated (BRCA1, CLSPN, MCM10, RRM2, and KIAA0101). Thus, it
is also possible that changes in IFN-I and metabolic genes could
be due to DNA damage caused by oxidative stress and/or
radiation exposure.
GO analysis of downregulated genes indicated enrichment in
cellular components related to the cell surface/membrane and
extracellular components as well as complement and coagulation
pathways (Fig. 1c, Supplementary Table 2). Decreased expression
of genes encoding factors classically associated with blood or
other tissues was observed, including complement and ﬁbrinogen
complex proteins (e.g., C3, FGG, FGA, and FGB) (Supplementary
Table 2). Fibrinogen and complement proteins are also expressed
by epithelial cells and play an important role in infection51–54.
However, as there are cases where RNA from fetal bovine serum
(FBS) in culture media has been detected in mRNA analyses55, we
cannot exclude the possibility of FBS interference. Importantly, the
same batch of heat-inactivated FBS was used for identical and
simultaneous preparation of all ﬂight and ground cultures in
this study.
We also performed iTRAQ analysis to obtain a snapshot of the
cellular proteomic proﬁle in the uninfected
ﬂight cultures
compared to ground controls. The presence of FBS in the culture
media resulted in strong interference from bovine proteins; a
subset of which could not be distinguished from human proteins
due to their identical sequence homologies and thus were
excluded from our analysis. Despite this challenge, we observed
ﬂight-associated upregulation of the major cytoskeletal proteins
G-actin and tubulin, which are known targets of Salmonella
effectors to facilitate invasion56 (Supplementary Table 3). HSPA1A
protein was also 2.4-fold upregulated in ﬂight. None of these
proteins were differentially regulated at the transcriptional level;
however, it is fairly common to see divergence in mRNA and
protein expression due to a variety of biological factors, such as
alterations in posttranscriptional modiﬁcations, translation efﬁ-
ciency and RNA or protein stabilities (reviewed by Maier et al.)57.
We then examined the data for the infections performed with
Salmonella during spaceﬂight and in our ground controls. The
experiment was designed to automatically inject 1 mL bacterial
inoculum (~1 × 107 colony forming units (CFU)) into HT-29
cultures. Postlanding hardware inspection revealed that all ﬂight
samples received the intended volume of bacteria; however,
ground controls received slightly different volumes (see “Meth-
ods” section). The 6-h incubation in the absence of gentamicin
would have allowed sufﬁcient time for the bacteria to replicate in
the media during attachment and invasion, but it is unknown
whether differences in initial inoculum eventually equalized. In
addition, while we had sufﬁcient material to perform iTRAQ
analysis using triplicate cultures, only one infected ﬂight sample
J. Barrila et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 

had enough material remaining after proteomics for RNA-seq,
thus we analyzed multiple technical replicates from a single ﬂight
bioreactor for that condition (see “Methods” section). Acknowl-
edging these limitations, given the rare nature of these samples
due to the inherent difﬁculty in performing spaceﬂight infections,
we present a preliminary analysis of the host and pathogen
response during spaceﬂight infection. Rather than focusing on the
direct quantitative comparison between the infected ﬂight and
ground cultures, we instead focused on evaluating the gene
expression patterns elicited during either a spaceﬂight or ground-
based infection relative to their respective controls (infected vs.
uninfected for ﬂight and ground) (Fig. 2; Supplementary Tables 4–
7). However, we also include the direct comparisons of the host
response to infection between ﬂight and ground for comparison
in future studies (Supplementary Table 8), as well as the bacterial
genes expressed above background during the ﬂight and ground
infections (Supplementary Tables 9 and 10) and directly between
ﬂight and ground infected cultures (Supplementary Table 11).
Analysis of ﬂight and ground cultures indicates both common
and distinct host transcriptional proﬁles in response to Salmonella
infection (Fig. 2; Supplementary Tables 4–7). Overall, 35 transcripts
were altered in response to infection in both ﬂight and ground
conditions; 28 genes in the same direction and 7 oppositely
regulated (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Tables 4–7). Relative to their
respective uninfected controls, both ﬂight- and ground-infected
cultures displayed enrichment in biological functions and path-
ways expected for Salmonella-infected cultures, including the
upregulation of genes involved in inﬂammation (TNF, IL-1, NF-κB,
and NOD signaling), response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and cell
chemotaxis (Fig. 2d; Supplementary Tables 5 and 7). Interaction of
Salmonella with the intestinal epithelium initiates a series of
signaling cascades leading to intestinal inﬂammation58. In vivo,
this defensive response serves to recruit neutrophils and other
immune cells to the site of infection but can also lead to the
generation of ROS that confers a strategic advantage for
Salmonella to outcompete resident microbiota58. Both ﬂight and
ground infections induced upregulation of IRAK2, a protein that
plays a central role in TLR signaling to NF-κB for the production of
pro-inﬂammatory mediators59. NF-κB-related genes commonly
induced during both ﬂight and ground infections included the Rel
protein NFKB2 and the atypical IκB member, NFKBIZ (Supplemen-
tary Tables 4 and 6). RELB and REL, which encode distinct Rel
proteins which are induced in response to pathogen-associated
molecular patterns/PAMPs (e.g., ﬂagellin, LPS), were also upregu-
lated in ﬂight and ground infections, respectively (Supplementary
Tables 4 and 6). In line with these observations, both ﬂight and
ground infections led to the upregulation of transcripts encoding
several chemokines important for recruiting neutrophils and other
immune cells to the site of infection, including CXCL1, CXCL2,
CXCL3, CXCL8, and CCL20. NFKBIZ encodes NF-κB inhibitor zeta
(IκBζ), which both represses and activates select NF-κB genes60.
IκBζ is rapidly induced in response to infection or exposure to
potent TLR stimuli and is an important inhibitor of nuclear NF-κB
activity to prevent uncontrolled inﬂammation61. These ﬁndings
conﬁrm that during spaceﬂight, Salmonella can induce a subset of
the known
biosignatures
of infection
in the
host
at the
transcriptional level.
In addition to those commonly observed responses, both ﬂight
and
ground
cultures
also
displayed
unique
transcriptional
responses to infection (Fig. 2b, c; Supplementary Tables 4–7).
DAVID analysis of upregulated genes in the infected ﬂight cultures
indicated that they were enriched for negative regulation of NF-κB
transcription
factor
activity
as
well
as
those
involved
in
Epstein–Barr virus infection (Fig. 2c). Genes belonging to these
categories overlap with those known to be important for
Salmonella infection. Two uniquely upregulated genes of interest
belonging to these categories were anti-inﬂammatory mediator
NFKBIA (IκBα) and NF-κB transcription factor, RELB. IκBα functions
by sequestering NF-κB in the cytoplasm to prevent its transloca-
tion to the nucleus62. RelB is induced in response to severe
systemic inﬂammation, LPS, ﬂagellin and/or TNF stimulation and is
required for sustained expression of IκBα during LPS tolerance62.
Both proteins are known to be targeted by Salmonella to suppress
host inﬂammation and/or apoptosis63,64. Changes in the expres-
sion of these transcripts may reﬂect an attempt by the host and/or
pathogen to initiate processes to suppress excessive inﬂammation
or apoptosis during the ﬂight infection.
Ground cultures uniquely displayed enrichment in select
upregulated genes associated with cell chemotaxis and inﬂamma-
tion (the latter include genes classiﬁed by DAVID under the
‘Rheumatoid arthritis’ category but overlap in their role for
Salmonella infection). Conversely, downregulated genes were
enriched for diverse biological processes (e.g., cell adhesion,
ECM
organization,
ﬁbrinogen
complex,
glycolysis,
hypoxia),
cellular components (e.g., cell surface/membrane, exosome, and
ﬁbrinogen complex), molecular functions associated with binding
and KEGG pathway involved in ECM-receptor interaction. Inter-
estingly, although we observed the expected stimulation of TLR4
(Toll-like receptor 4) in the ground-based infection (Supplemen-
tary Table 6), this did not occur in the ﬂight cultures at the time
point evaluated. In alignment with the TLR4 trends, LPS-inducible
PIGR was also upregulated only during the ground infection
(Supplementary Table 6). A previous study using astronaut
monocytes observed a signiﬁcant decrease in TLR4 expression
immediately following return from a space shuttle mission relative
to measurements taken 10 days before launch and 15 days post
landing65. Similarly, TLR4 was also downregulated in blood cells in-
ﬂight and post-ﬂight relative to pre-ﬂight levels during the Twins
study48. PIGR encodes polymeric immunoglobulin receptor which
transports dimeric secretory IgA (sIgA) across the epithelium and
into intestinal secretions as part of the ﬁrst line of defense in
mucosal immunity. Our ﬁndings could indicate the potential for an
altered intestinal mucosal immune response to infection in
spaceﬂight. Hindlimb unloading disrupted intestinal immune
homeostasis in rats, leading to decreased sIgA levels in the ileum,
although the activation of TLR4/MyD88/NF-kB was still observed66.
In astronauts, PIGR and/or sIgA expression in saliva or blood has
increased following spaceﬂight48,67,68. However, sIgA levels in
extraintestinal
sites
are
not
always
predictive
of
intestinal
responses69,70. Thus, there is a need for further investigation into
how spaceﬂight regulates these intestinal-speciﬁc responses.
iTRAQ analysis further revealed unique differences at the
protein level in HT-29 cells for ﬂight and ground infections.
Keratins 8 and 18 (KRT 8, KRT18), both targets of the Salmonella
effector SipC during invasion56, were downregulated in the
infected ﬂight cultures relative to the uninfected ﬂight cultures
(Supplementary
Table
3).
In
contrast,
these
proteins
were
upregulated in response to infection in ground cultures (Supple-
mentary Table 3). Infected ﬂight cultures also displayed the
downregulation of two additional cytoskeletal proteins, ACTG1
and TUBA1C, as well as a retinal dehydrogenase, ALDH1A1. As
mentioned above, spaceﬂight-induced alterations in the unin-
fected ﬂight cultures in several of these structural proteins relative
to the uninfected ground controls, which may indicate the
presence of an altered or dysregulated cytoskeletal landscape at
the starting point for the infection. Spaceﬂight is known to alter
the organization and/or expression of structural proteins14,20,21.
Infection in ground controls induced changes in the expression of
proteins with various functions, including heat shock/protein
folding, RNA-binding, calcium-sensing, and disulﬁde bond cata-
lysis (Supplementary Table 3). Heat shock protein HSPA1A was
upregulated during infection in ground cultures but not in
response to infection in ﬂight. This difference between the ﬂight
and ground infections could possibly be attributed to the fact that
the protein was already 2.4-fold upregulated in ﬂight even in the
absence of infection (see uninfected ﬂight vs. ground comparison
J. Barrila et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Fig. 2
Transcriptional responses of HT-29 cells elicited in response to infection with S. Typhimurium during ﬂight or ground culture.
a Volcano plots. Differentially expressed genes between infected and uninfected host cells during spaceﬂight (left panel) or in matching
ground controls (right panel). Red: signiﬁcantly upregulated genes in response to infection. Blue: signiﬁcantly downregulated genes.
Signiﬁcance determined according to a log2 fold change in expression of at least ±1 and FDR < 0.05. The top 5 signiﬁcantly up and
downregulated genes are labeled. b Venn diagram. Overlapping and distinct genes elicited in response to infection in ﬂight and ground
cultures. c, d Uniquely and commonly enriched GO terms and KEGG pathways in response to infection either in ﬂight or ground cultures
relative to their respective uninfected controls. Analysis was performed in DAVID 6.8 using upregulated (red) or downregulated (blue)
transcripts using an EASE score of 0.05 and Benjamini–Hochberg correction to determine signiﬁcantly enriched terms and pathways (adjusted
P < 0.05). BP biological process, CC cellular component, MF molecular function. Bars in d indicate the results for a ﬂight infection (yellow; ﬂight
infected/uninfected) and ground infection (gray; ground infected/uninfected).
J. Barrila et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 

in Supplementary Table 3). Thus, the ﬂight-cultured cells may have
had sufﬁcient amounts of HSPA1A protein readily available for
response to infection. HSPA1A is a major stress-inducible member
of the HSP70 family and can be upregulated as part of a
cytoprotective response to a variety of stressors, including
infection71. Heat shock proteins have previously shown altered
expression (RNA and protein) in a variety of mammalian, plant,
and prokaryotic cells during spaceﬂight or spaceﬂight analog
culture, though not in a uniﬁed direction72, which is not surprising
given their diverse functions. For example, multiple HSP70
transcripts were upregulated during BRIC-16, an Arabidopsis
thaliana tissue culture payload aboard STS-131 (the same Shuttle
mission as the present study)72.
We also performed a direct comparison between infected ﬂight
and ground cultures under the previously described limitations
(Supplementary
Table
8).
Direct
comparison
indicated
that
infection during spaceﬂight-induced upregulation of host genes
associated with inﬂammation, response to Salmonella challenge
and/or wound healing relative to infected ground controls,
including CXCL8 (IL-8), CXCL2, CSF2, IL36B, MAPK13, JUN, FOS,
KLC2, NCF2, FLNA, RHOG, among others (Supplementary Table 8).
IL-8 chemokine expression can be stimulated by both LPS and
ﬂagellin73. Elevated IL-8 levels were previously observed in a
postﬂight challenge using puriﬁed LPS from Escherichia coli (E. coli)
and astronaut immune cells, the latter collected either in-ﬂight or
at landing (relative to pre-ﬂight levels)4,65. Interestingly, both
increased and decreased IL-8 responses have been observed
following postﬂight LPS challenge in crew immune cells74. An
overall blunted response to E. coli LPS was observed when
endothelial cells were challenged during spaceﬂight, including
only a modest increase in IL-8 expression by ﬂight cultures relative
to ground75. As is the case in terrestrial studies, IL-8 responses to
LPS challenge in the context of spaceﬂight will depend on the
type of LPS and host cells evaluated, as well as LPS exposure in the
context of a live pathogen. In this study, TLR4 was signiﬁcantly
downregulated in the infected ﬂight samples relative to infected
ground cultures (Supplementary Table 8), which suggests that the
enhanced expression of pro-inﬂammatory mediators (e.g., CXCL8)
in the infected ﬂight cultures may rely more heavily on other
interactions, such as ﬂagellin-mediated interactions with TLR5.
Alternatively, the kinetics of infection may have been altered
between ﬂight and ground cultures, where TLR4 expression in the
infected ﬂight cultures may have occurred outside of our analysis
time point. Future studies following the in-ﬂight kinetics of
infection would provide insight in this regard. iTRAQ analysis
indicated that infection during spaceﬂight induced downregula-
tion of multiple cytoskeletal genes and retinal dehydrogenase 1
relative to infected ground cultures (Supplementary Table 3).
Direct comparison of the bacterial transcripts between infected
ﬂight and ground cultures indicated 328 upregulated genes and 1
downregulated
gene
(Supplementary
Table
11).
Transcripts
associated with metabolism (glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, TCA
cycle, purine and pyrimidine metabolism, amino sugar and
nucleotide sugar metabolism),
protein translation, antibiotic
synthesis,
amino
acid
biosynthesis,
RNA
degradation,
and
biosynthesis of siderophore group non-ribosomal peptides were
upregulated in ﬂight. We also observed the upregulation of the
AcrAB-TolC multidrug efﬂux pump (Supplementary Table 11).
Though we did not see changes in Salmonella pathogenicity island
1 or 2 (SPI-1 or SPI-2) virulence genes, transcripts encoding major
global virulence and/or stress regulators rpoS, rpoE, and rpoH were
upregulated in ﬂight relative to ground controls.
Another global regular, hfq, was found to be expressed above
background levels in the ﬂight cultures, but not the ground
cultures (Supplementary Tables 9 and 10). However, in the direct
comparison between infected ﬂight and ground cultures, while
we did observe an upward trend in hfq expression during
spaceﬂight, it was not signiﬁcant by FDR (7.8-fold; FDR = 0.24,
p value = 0.006). In our previous studies, hfq was downregulated
in Salmonella in response to both spaceﬂight and spaceﬂight
analog culture9,12. Deletion of the gene impacted RWV trends in
acid stress resistance and macrophage survival9. Hfq post-
transcriptionally regulates gene expression by pairing mRNAs
with cognate small non-coding RNAs to either inhibit or facilitate
translation76. Given the diverse functions of hfq and its ability to
both positively and negatively regulate translation, its absolute
expression
level
can
change
depending
on
environmental
conditions77. The conditions in our current study (GTSF-2 media,
37C, 5% CO2) are very different from those in our STS-115
experiment which solely looked at pure cultures of Salmonella
(Lennox Broth/LB, ambient temperature). In addition, our STS-115
study was performed in the absence of the host, as all infections
with microgravity-grown bacteria were done immediately upon
landing. In our present study, the bacteria were co-cultured with
host cells that had either been exposed to spaceﬂight prior to
infection or infected as ground controls. Thus, the host cells in our
current study experienced different environmental conditions
(microgravity vs. unit gravity), which could also potentially
contribute to observed bacterial differences. In addition, the
cellular mRNA and protein concentration of hfq is tightly
controlled by autoregulation and mRNA expression is also under
control of several promoters, including σ32 (encoded by rpoH, a
global stress response regulator that was also upregulated in
response to spaceﬂight, Supplementary Table 11)77. It is unlikely
that the Hfq protein was completely suppressed in ground
cultures given its important role in diverse cellular functions;
however, since bacterial proteins were not detected in our
proteomics analysis these levels are unknown. If indeed elevated
amounts of Hfq protein were present in the ground cultures
relative to ﬂight, it is possible that mRNA expression was inhibited
in the ground cultures via autoregulation. Future studies will seek
to conﬁrm these gene expression trends and identify the
associated regulatory mechanisms.
To our knowledge, this study was the ﬁrst to examine how
human cells respond to microbial infection when both the host
and pathogen are simultaneously exposed to spaceﬂight. In
addition, it is the ﬁrst global transcriptomic and proteomic
proﬁling of human intestinal epithelial cultures during spaceﬂight
(either infected or uninfected). Although the sample size was small
in this study due to technical limitations, the results from this
investigation suggest that spaceﬂight altered the transcriptional
and proteomic proﬁles of both uninfected and infected host cells.
Spaceﬂight culture of the uninfected cells led to the upregulation
of genes associated with IFN-I signaling and decreased expression
of multiple bioenergetic pathways, suggesting the potential for
decreased proliferation relative to ground cultures. Decreased
proliferation could be due to the changes in tumorigenic
potential, differentiation or DNA damage responses. Salmonella
infection induced a core set of pro-inﬂammatory responses in
both conditions, but spaceﬂight culture also induced unique
transcriptional and proteomic responses not observed in the
identical ground controls. Trends observed between infected
ﬂight and ground samples were consistent with a heightened
response of host cells to infection with Salmonella during
spaceﬂight, including ampliﬁed induction of genes encoding
pro-inﬂammatory mediators and wound healing. These ﬁndings
are important to consider in the context of previously observed
changes in astronaut intestinal microbiota3,48,78, where some
alterations were linked with decreased abundance of anti-
inﬂammatory species and increases in select pro-inﬂammatory
species3,78. In addition, the use of nutritional countermeasures to
prevent or mitigate infection including the modulation of
nutritional supplements2,10 or probiotic microbes for intestinal
health
during
spaceﬂight
(including
for
protection
against
pathogens)79–81 are active areas of research and have shown
promise in ground-based studies. Our investigation adds to the
J. Barrila et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

growing number of studies aimed at mitigating infectious disease
risks to humans during spaceﬂight missions and for the general
public on Earth.
METHODS
Mammalian cell lines, bacterial strains, and ﬂight hardware
The human colonic epithelial cell line, HT-29 (ATCC, HTB-38), was
cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in GTSF-2 media (Hyclone) supplemented
with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc), 2.25 g sodium
bicarbonate (Fisher Scientiﬁc) and 5 mL insulin transferrin selenite
(Sigma-Aldrich) per liter. Media used to expand cells as monolayers
contained Penicillin–Streptomycin (10 units/mL and 10 µg/mL, respec-
tively; Sigma-Aldrich) and fungizone (0.5 µg/mL). Flight culture media
contained only streptomycin (Sm) and fungizone. Infection studies were
performed with wild-type S. Typhimurium χ3339, a mouse-passaged
derivative of SL1344 which is naturally Sm-resistant24. Bacteria were
cultured in Lennox Broth (LB) containing 0.3 M NaCl prior to loading in
the hardware, as described below. HT-29 cells were cultured in 2.2 mL
hollow ﬁber bioreactors (Spectrum Labs) that were housed in the Cell
Culture Module (CCM; Tissue Genesis). The CCM hardware enabled
automated media perfusion, addition of bacteria to perform infections
and sample ﬁxation. Flight comparisons were made to identical ground
controls housed in the same hardware at NASA Kennedy Space Center
(KSC). The ﬂight hardware and experimental layout are shown in Fig. 1.
Preparation of S. Typhimurium
Ten days before launch, S. Typhimurium strain χ3339 was streaked from a
glycerol stock onto LB agar plates containing 100 µg/mL Sm and incubated
at 37 °C overnight. Bacterial colonies were then used to inoculate overnight
cultures grown for 15–16 h. with aeration in LB media containing 0.3 M NaCl
and 100 µg/mL Sm at 37 °C. Cultures were pelleted at 7000 r.p.m. and
resuspended in Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS; Invitrogen).
Bacteria were quantiﬁed by plating for viable CFU per mL and diluted to
1 × 107 CFU/mL in DPBS to maintain the bacteria as viable but not actively
growing. On L-7, ﬂight bacteria bags were ﬁlled with 2 mL of the cultures
and maintained at room temperature until attachment to the ﬂow paths
2 days prior to launch (L-2).
Preparation of hollow ﬁber bioreactors, media bags and
ﬁxatives
Sterile bioreactors were wetted with 70% ethanol (10 mL) and then rinsed
in triplicate with 10 mL DPBS. A 1 mg/mL collagen I solution (bovine,
Corning) in DPBS was then introduced through the ECS ports to coat the
hollow ﬁbers. After 1 h, bioreactors were rinsed in triplicate with DPBS
through the ECS ports to remove unbound collagen. Bioreactors were
rinsed in triplicate with 10 mL of warm ﬂight medium and placed at 37 °C
until ready for loading with HT-29 cells. Flight and ground control bags
contained either 60 mL of ﬂight culture media or 40 mL RNAlater II ﬁxative
(Ambion) for transcriptomic and proteomic analyses.
Preparation and loading of HT-29 cells into ﬂight hardware
HT-29 cells were expanded as monolayers in T-75 ﬂasks. Four days prior
to launch, conﬂuent monolayers were washed in warm Hank’s Balanced
Salt Solution without calcium and magnesium (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc),
dissociated using 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA (Corning), and counted using
trypan blue exclusion to determine cell viability. Approximately 1 × 106
HT-29 cells were loaded into twelve 2.2 mL hollow ﬁber bioreactors
(Spectrum) through the ECS ports (Fig. 1). Six bioreactors were
designated for ﬂight (three infected and three time-matched uninfected
controls) and six for identical ground controls. Bioreactors were placed at
37 °C and rotated every 15 min until attachment to the CCM rails together
with the ﬂight media bags. CCM rails are organizational subunits within
the CCM that facilitate gas and media delivery. Rails were placed into a
37 °C incubator and monitored for contamination. Media was circulated
within the ICS of the ﬁbers during the experiment at a ﬂow rate of 6 mL/
min. The day prior to launch, the fully loaded rails containing the HT-29
cells, media, ﬁxatives and bacteria (maintained in stasis in DPBS) were
integrated into the CCM, which was then sealed, powered and the
temperature set to 37 °C. The CCM was turned over to the KSC integration
team at L-18 h. STL-IMMUNE launched aboard Space Shuttle Discovery
(STS-131) on April 5, 2010 at 6:21 a.m.
In-ﬂight operations
At approximately L + 3 h, astronauts activated the on-orbit programming
of the CCM. On mission elapsed day 11, the CCM was programmed to
automatically inject 1 mL (~1 × 107 bacteria) into a subset of the hollow
ﬁber bioreactors to enable infection at the apical surface of host cells. Six
hours after the bacteria were injected, RNAlater II was injected into the
designated bioreactors and the rails were turned off to maintain sample
temperature at 29–30 °C until landing.
Postlanding processing
STL-IMMUNE landed at KSC at 9:08 a.m. on April 20, 2010. All bioreactors
and bags were removed from the rails and stored at 4 °C. Each reactor was
carefully opened, cells and hollow ﬁbers were maintained in RNAlater II at
−80 °C until further processing. Inspection of the remaining volumes in the
bacterial bags post ﬂight indicated that all infected ﬂight cultures received
the intended 1 mL bacterial injection. Infected ground cultures received 0.8
and 0.4 mL injections for two replicates used for both the RNA-seq/iTRAQ
analysis, and the third replicate received a 1.2 mL injection (this sample
used for iTRAQ analysis only). For processing, RNAlater II-ﬁxed samples
were thawed at 4 °C. Samples were concentrated using a Vivaspin 20
(0.2 µm) concentrator. Cells were allowed to settle at 4 °C, the supernatant
was removed and then processed for iTRAQ and/or RNA-seq analysis.
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)
analysis
Proteomic analysis using iTRAQ was performed on total cellular protein
from HT-29 cells from triplicate ﬂight and ground bioreactors (n = 3 for
ﬂight and ground infected and uninfected cultures). Cells were lysed with 1
cell bed volume of RLT buffer (Qiagen) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-
free protease inhibitor (Roche), vortexed and passed 5–7 times through a
25G needle to facilitate lysis. After a 10-min incubation on ice, lysates were
centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Lysates were added to a
desalting column (Pierce) and eluted by centrifugation at 1000 × g for
2 min. From each condition 25 μg protein sample was prepared according
to the manufacturer’s instruction (iTRAQ reagents—4plex Application kit,
Applied Biosystems). Brieﬂy, after protein reduction, alkylation, tryptic
digestion (Promega), and labeling with iTRAQ 4plex, peptide samples were
quenched before pooled and vacuum-dried. The combined iTRAQ-reagent
labeled sample was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic
acid before separated with a 145-min gradient elution (using a Tempo LC
MALDI Spotting system (Applied Biosystems)) and analyzed with a 4800
MALDI-tandem
time-of-ﬂight
(TOF/TOF)
mass
spectrometer
(Applied
Biosystems) as described82. Protein identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation was
performed with ProteinPilot 4.0 software using Paragon algorithm. The
search parameters were as follows: iTRAQ 4plex (peptide labeled), trypsin as
the digestion agent, UniProt database Homo sapiens (created on March
2009), ID focus: biological modiﬁcation. Proteins were considered as
differentially expressed according to the following criteria: greater than a
twofold expression change, p value ≤0.05 (two-tailed ANOVA). Differential
proteins were identiﬁed with at least three unique peptides (>95%
conﬁdence, 1% FDR). Identiﬁed and quantiﬁed proteins by LC MALDI-MS/
MS are shown in Supplementary Dataset 1.
RNA-Seq
RNA was extracted from ﬂight and ground cultures using remaining
samples following the proteomics processing. From the remaining
samples, RNA-seq analyses were performed using duplicate ﬂight and
ground bioreactors for all conditions (n = 2 biological replicates) except for
the infected ﬂight samples, which only had sufﬁcient sample remaining to
evaluate duplicate technical aliquots from a single bioreactor (i.e., n = 1
biological; n = 2 technical replicates). RNAlater II-ﬁxed samples were lysed
with 700 µl Qiazol (Qiagen), vortexed extensively and passed several times
through a 25G needle. After a 5-min static incubation at room temperature
with intermittent vortexing, samples were added to MaXtract High-Density
tubes (Qiagen) together with 100 µl RNase-free water (Qiagen) and 200 µl
chloroform (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were then processed using the
miRNeasy kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions,
including on-column DNase-treatment. RNA was quantiﬁed using a
Nanodrop spectrophotometer and the integrity validated using an Agilent
Bioanalyzer 2100 to conﬁrm an RNA integrity number (RIN) of 7 or greater
for all samples. All RIN were between 7 and 8 except for one of the
uninfected ground control samples which had a RIN of 6.4.
J. Barrila et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 

RNA was fragmented with heat and magnesium to roughly 300 bp using
the KAPA HyperPrep RNA-seq kit (Roche). The KAPA Hyper RNA-seq kit and
Illumina-compatible adapters (IDT) were used for the remaining library
construction. Adapter ligated molecules were cleaned using Kapa pure
beads (Kapa Biosciences) and ampliﬁed with Kapa HIFI enzyme. Each
library was then analyzed for fragment size on an Agilent Tapestation and
quantiﬁed by qPCR (KAPA Library Quantiﬁcation Kit) on Quantstudio 5
(ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). Libraries were then multiplexed and sequenced
on 2 × 150 ﬂow cells on the NovaSeq platform (Illumina) at University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus Genomics and Microarray Core. RNA-
seq reads for each sample were quality checked using FastQC v0.10.1 and
aligned to Human GRCh38.p7 primary assembly and S. Typhimurium LT2
genome using STAR v2.5.1b. A series of quality control metrics were
generated on the STAR outputs. Cufﬂinks v2.2.1 was used to report FPKM
values (Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per Million mapped reads) and
read counts. Transcripts per million was calculated by an in-house R script.
Differential expression analysis was performed with EdgeR package from
Bioconductor v3.2 in R 3.2.3. Multidimensional scaling plots were drawn by
plotMDS, in which distances correspond to leading log-fold-changes
between samples. For each pairwise comparison, genes with FDR <0.05
were considered signiﬁcant and log2-fold changes of expression between
conditions (logFC) were reported.
GO biological process and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
DAVID 6.8 was used to perform the enrichment analysis of RNA-seq data.
Data were corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, had
threshold count of 2 and EASE score of 0.05.
Reporting summary
Further information on experimental design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this paper.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All data generated during this study are either included in the manuscript and its
Supplementary ﬁles (Supplementary Dataset 1) or are available from the corresponding
authors upon reasonable request. RNA-Seq data are available at the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database (GSE156066; BioProject PRJNA656571) and NASA GeneLab
(https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-323).
Received: 27 August 2020; Accepted: 3 February 2021;
REFERENCES
1. Mcpee, J. C. & Charles, J. B. Human Health and Performance Risks of Space
Exploration Missions. (US National Aeronautics and Space Admin; NASA SP-2009-
3405 edition, 2010).
2. Crucian, B. E. et al. Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight: potential
countermeasures for deep space exploration missions. Front Immunol. 9, 1437
(2018).
3. Voorhies, A. A. & Lorenzi, H. A. The challenge of maintaining a healthy micro-
biome during long-duration space missions. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 3, https://doi.
org/10.3389/fspas.2016.00023 (2016).
4. Crucian, B. et al. Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration
spaceﬂight. NPJ Microgravity 1, 15013 (2015).
5. Castro, V. A., Thrasher, A. N., Healy, M., Ott, C. M. & Pierson, D. L. Microbial
characterization during the early habitation of the International Space Station.
Micro. Ecol. 47, 119–126 (2004).
6. Yamaguchi, N. et al. Microbial monitoring of crewed habitats in space-current
status and future perspectives. Microbes Environ. 29, 250–260 (2014).
7. Kish, A. L. et al. Biostability and Microbiological Analysis Of Shuttle Crew Refuse.
(SAE Technical Paper #2002-01-2356, 2002).
8. Singh, N. K., Wood, J. M., Karouia, F. & Venkateswaran, K. Succession and persis-
tence of microbial communities and antimicrobial resistance genes associated with
International Space Station environmental surfaces. Microbiome 6, 204 (2018).
9. Wilson, J. W. et al. Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and
reveals a role for global regulator Hfq. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104, 16299–16304
(2007).
10. Wilson, J. W. et al. Media ion composition controls regulatory and virulence
response of Salmonella in spaceﬂight. PLoS ONE 3, e3923 (2008).
11. Wilson, J. W. et al. Low-Shear modeled microgravity alters the Salmonella enterica
serovar typhimurium stress response in an RpoS-independent manner. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 68, 5408–5416 (2002).
12. Wilson, J. W. et al. Microarray analysis identiﬁes Salmonella genes belonging to
the low-shear modeled microgravity regulon. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99,
13807–13812 (2002).
13. Gilbert, R. et al. Spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity conditions increase
virulence of Serratia marcescens in the Drosophila melanogaster infection model.
npj Microgravity 6, 4 (2020).
14. Nickerson, C. A, Pellis, N. R. & Ott, C. M. Effect of Spaceﬂight and Spaceﬂight
Analogue Culture on Human and Microbial Cells: Novel Insights into Disease
Mechanisms (Springer, 2016).
15. Horneck, G., Klaus, D. M. & Mancinelli, R. L. Space microbiology. Microbiol. Mol.
Biol. Rev. 74, 121–156, (2010).
16. Mermel, L. A. Infection prevention and control during prolonged human space
travel. Clin. Infect. Dis. 56, 123–130 (2013).
17. Barrila, J. et al. Modeling host-pathogen interactions in the context of the
microenvironment: three-dimensional cell culture comes of age. Infect. Immun.
86, https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.00282-18 (2018).
18. Bissell, M. J. & Aggeler, J. Dynamic reciprocity: how do extracellular matrix
and hormones direct gene expression? Prog. Clin. Biol. Res 249, 251–262
(1987).
19. Ingber, D. E. How cells (might) sense microgravity. FASEB J. 13, S3–S15 (1999).
20. Hughes-Fulford, M. Function of the cytoskeleton in gravisensing during space-
ﬂight. Adv. Space Res. 32, 1585–1593 (2003).
21. Lewis, M. L. The cytoskeleton, apoptosis, and gene expression in T lymphocytes
and other mammalian cells exposed to altered gravity. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 8,
77–128 (2002).
22. Ibarra, J. A. & Steele-Mortimer, O. Salmonella-the ultimate insider. Salmonella
virulence
factors
that
modulate
intracellular
survival.
Cell
Microbiol.
11,
1579–1586 (2009).
23. Gruenheid, S. & Finlay, B. B. Microbial pathogenesis and cytoskeletal function.
Nature 422, 775–781 (2003).
24. Nickerson, C. A. et al. Microgravity as a novel environmental signal affecting
Salmonella enterica Serovar typhimurium virulence. Infect. Immun. 68, 3147–3152
(2000).
25. Castro, S. L., Nelman-Gonzalez, M., Nickerson, C. A. & Ott, C. M. Induction of
attachment-independent bioﬁlm formation and repression of Hfq expression by
low-ﬂuid-shear culture of Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77,
6368–6378 (2011).
26. Crabbé, A. et al. Response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 to low shear
modelled
microgravity
involves
AlgU
regulation.
Environ.
Microbiol.
12,
1545–1564 (2010).
27. Crabbe, A. et al. Transcriptional and proteomic responses of Pseudomonas aer-
uginosa PAO1 to spaceﬂight conditions involve Hfq regulation and reveal a role
for oxygen. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 1221–1230 (2011).
28. Grant, K. C., Khodadad, C. L. M. & Foster, J. S. Role of Hfq in an animal–microbe
symbiosis under simulated microgravity conditions. Int. J. Astrobiol. 13, 53–61
(2014).
29. Larsen, S. B., Cowley, C. J. & Fuchs, E. Epithelial cells: liaisons of immunity. Curr.
Opin. Immunol. 62, 45–53 (2020).
30. Allaire, J. M. et al. The intestinal epithelium: central coordinator of mucosal
immunity. Trends Immunol. 39, 677–696, (2018).
31. Carregaro, F., Stefanini, A. C., Henrique, T. & Tajara, E. H. Study of small proline-rich
proteins (SPRRs) in health and disease: a review of the literature. Arch. Dermatol.
Res. 305, 857–866 (2013).
32. Pradervand, S. et al. Small proline-rich protein 1A is a gp130 pathway- and stress-
inducible cardioprotective protein. EMBO J. 23, 4517–4525 (2004).
33. Pyle, A. L. et al. Regulation of the atheroma-enriched protein, SPRR3, in vascular
smooth muscle cells through cyclic strain is dependent on integrin alpha1beta1/
collagen interaction. Am. J. Pathol. 173, 1577–1588 (2008).
34. Pecaut, M. J. et al. Is spaceﬂight-induced immune dysfunction linked to systemic
changes in metabolism? PLOS ONE 12, e0174174 (2017).
35. McNab, F., Mayer-Barber, K., Sher, A., Wack, A. & O’Garra, A. Type I interferons in
infectious disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 87–103 (2015).
36. Kotredes, K. P., Thomas, B. & Gamero, A. M. The protective role of type I inter-
ferons in the gastrointestinal tract. Front. Immunol. 8, 410 (2017).
37. Katlinskaya, Y. V. et al. Type I interferons control proliferation and function of the
intestinal epithelium. Mol. Cell Biol. 36, 1124–1135 (2016).
38. Shi, L. et al. Spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity suppresses macrophage
development via altered RAS/ERK/NFkappaB and metabolic pathways. Cell. Mol.
Immunol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-019-0346-6 (2020).
39. Fritz, V. & Fajas, L. Metabolism and proliferation share common regulatory
pathways in cancer cells. Oncogene 29, 4369–4377 (2010).
J. Barrila et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

40. Leschner, S. & Weiss, S. Salmonella-allies in the ﬁght against cancer. J. Mol. Med.
88, 763–773 (2010).
41. Honer zu Bentrup, K. et al. Three-dimensional organotypic models of human
colonic epithelium to study the early stages of enteric salmonellosis. Microbes
Infect. 8, 1813–1825 (2006).
42. Barker, N., Tan, S. & Clevers, H. Lgr proteins in epithelial stem cell biology.
Development 140, 2484–2494 (2013).
43. Field, C. J., Johnson, I. R. & Schley, P. D. Nutrients and their role in host resistance
to infection. J. Leukoc. Biol. 71, 16–32 (2002).
44. Steeb, B. et al. Parallel exploitation of diverse host nutrients enhances Salmonella
virulence. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003301 (2013).
45. Jessup, J. M. et al. Microgravity culture reduces apoptosis and increases the
differentiation of a human colorectal carcinoma cell line. Vitr. Cell Dev. Biol. Anim.
36, 367–373 (2000).
46. Kumar, S., Suman, S., Fornace, A. J. Jr & Datta, K. Space radiation triggers per-
sistent stress response, increases senescent signaling, and decreases cell migra-
tion in mouse intestine. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E9832–E9841 (2018).
47. Moreno-Villanueva, M., Wong, M., Lu, T., Zhang, Y. & Wu, H. Interplay of space
radiation and microgravity in DNA damage and DNA damage response. NPJ
Microgravity 3, 14 (2017).
48. Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis
of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science 364. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aau8650 (2019).
49. George, K., Rhone, J., Beitman, A. & Cucinotta, F. A. Cytogenetic damage in the
blood lymphocytes of astronauts: effects of repeat long-duration space missions.
Mutat. Res. 756, 165–169 (2013).
50. Barrila, J. et al. Spaceﬂight modulates gene expression in the whole blood of
astronauts. npj Microgravity 2, 16039 (2016).
51. Simpson-Haidaris, P. J. et al. Induction of ﬁbrinogen expression in the lung epi-
thelium during Pneumocystis carinii Pneumonia. Infect. Immun. 66, 4431–4439
(1998).
52. Molmenti, E. P., Ziambaras, T. & Perlmutter, D. H. Evidence for an acute phase
response in human intestinal epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 14116–14124
(1993).
53. Andoh, A. et al. Detection of complement C3 and factor B gene expression in
normal colorectal mucosa, adenomas and carcinomas. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 111,
477–483 (1998).
54. Kulkarni, H. S., Liszewski, M. K., Brody, S. L. & Atkinson, J. P. The complement
system in the airway epithelium: an overlooked host defense mechanism and
therapeutic target? J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 141, 1582–1586 e1581 (2018).
55. Wei, Z., Batagov, A. O., Carter, D. R. & Krichevsky, A. M. Fetal bovine serum RNA
interferes with the cell culture derived extracellular RNA. Sci. Rep. 6, 31175 (2016).
56. Schleker, S. et al. The current Salmonella-host interactome. Proteom. Clin. Appl. 6,
117–133 (2012).
57. Maier, T., Guell, M. & Serrano, L. Correlation of mRNA and protein in complex
biological samples. FEBS Lett. 583, 3966–3973 (2009).
58. Broz, P., Ohlson, M. B. & Monack, D. M. Innate immune response to Salmonella
typhimurium, a model enteric pathogen. Gut Microbes 3, 62–70 (2012).
59. Keating, S. E., Maloney, G. M., Moran, E. M. & Bowie, A. G. IRAK-2 participates in
multiple toll-like receptor signaling pathways to NFkappaB via activation of
TRAF6 ubiquitination. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 33435–33443 (2007).
60. Muller, A. et al. IkappaBzeta is a key transcriptional regulator of IL-36-driven
psoriasis-related gene expression in keratinocytes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115,
10088–10093 (2018).
61. Yamazaki, S., Muta, T. & Takeshige, K. A novel IkappaB protein, IkappaB-zeta,
induced by proinﬂammatory stimuli, negatively regulates nuclear factor-kappaB
in the nuclei. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 27657–27662 (2001).
62. Chen, X. et al. RelB sustains IkappaBalpha expression during endotoxin tolerance.
Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 16, 104–110 (2009).
63. Le Negrate, G. et al. Salmonella secreted factor L deubiquitinase of Salmonella
typhimurium inhibits NF-kappaB, suppresses IkappaBalpha ubiquitination and
modulates innate immune responses. J. Immunol. 180, 5045–5056 (2008).
64. Sun, H., Kamanova, J., Lara-Tejero, M. & Galan, J. E. A family of Salmonella type IIi
secretion effector proteins selectively targets the NF-kappaB signaling pathway
to preserve host homeostasis. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005484 (2016).
65. Kaur, I., Simons, E. R., Kapadia, A. S., Ott, C. M. & Pierson, D. L. Effect of spaceﬂight
on ability of monocytes to respond to endotoxins of gram-negative bacteria. Clin.
Vaccin. Immunol. 15, 1523–1528 (2008).
66. Jin, M. et al. Responses of intestinal mucosal barrier functions of rats to simulated
weightlessness. Front. Physiol. 9, 729 (2018).
67. Mednieks, M. H. A. In Oral Tissue Responses to Travel in Space. Beyond LEO - Human
Health Issues for Deep Space Exploration (ed Reynolds, R. J.) (IntechOpen, 2019).
68. Spielmann, G. et al. B cell homeostasis is maintained during long-duration
spaceﬂight. J. Appl. Physiol. 126, 469–476 (2018).
69. Aase, A. et al. Salivary IgA from the sublingual compartment as a novel non-
invasive proxy for intestinal immune induction. Mucosal Immunol. 9, 884–893
(2016).
70. Externest, D., Meckelein, B., Schmidt, M. A. & Frey, A. Correlations between
antibody immune responses at different mucosal effector sites are controlled by
antigen type and dosage. Infect. Immun. 68, 3830–3839 (2000).
71. Ding, X. Z. et al. HSP-70 mitigates LPS/SKI-induced cell damage by increasing
sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1). Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 92, 1–7 (2010).
72. Zupanska, A. K., Denison, F. C., Ferl, R. J. & Paul, A. L. Spaceﬂight engages heat
shock protein and other molecular chaperone genes in tissue culture cells of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Am. J. Bot. 100, 235–248 (2013).
73. Audy, J., Mathieu, O., Belvis, J. & Tompkins, T. A. Transcriptomic response of
immune signalling pathways in intestinal epithelial cells exposed to lipopoly-
saccharides, Gram-negative bacteria or potentially probiotic microbes. Benef.
Microbes 3, 273–286 (2012).
74. Crucian, B., Stowe, R., Quiriarte, H., Pierson, D. & Sams, C. Monocyte phenotype
and cytokine production proﬁles are dysregulated by short-duration spaceﬂight.
Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 82, 857–862 (2011).
75. Chakraborty, N. et al. An integrated omics analysis: impact of microgravity on
host response to lipopolysaccharide in vitro. BMC Genom. 15, 659 (2014).
76. Vogel, J. & Luisi, B. F. Hfq and its constellation of RNA. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9,
578–589 (2011).
77. Morita, T. & Aiba, H. Mechanism and physiological signiﬁcance of autoregulation
of the Escherichia coli hfq gene. RNA 25, 264–276 (2019).
78. Voorhies, A. A. et al. Study of the impact of long-duration space missions at the
International Space Station on the astronaut microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 9911
(2019).
79. Castro-Wallace, S., Stahl, S., Voorhies, A., Lorenzi, H. & Douglas, G. L. Response of
Lactobacillus acidophilus ATCC 4356 to low-shear modeled microgravity. Acta
Astronautica 139, 463–468 (2017).
80. Shao, D. et al. Simulated microgravity affects some biological characteristics
of Lactobacillus acidophilus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 101, 3439–3449
(2017).
81. Turroni, S. et al. Gut microbiome and space travelers’ health: state of the art and
possible pro/prebiotic strategies for long-term space missions. Front. Physiol. 11,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.553929 (2020).
82. Hansmeier, N., Chao, T. C., Goldman, L. R., Witter, F. R. & Halden, R. U. Prioritization
of biomarker targets in human umbilical cord blood: identiﬁcation of proteins in
infant blood serving as validated biomarkers in adults. Environ. Health Perspect.
120, 764–769 (2012).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by NASA grants NNX09AH40G (C.A.N., C.M.O., J.B.) and
80NSSC18K1478 (C.A.N., C.M.O., and J.B.; includes NASA PECASE funding to J.B.).
We thank Dr. Mitch Magee for his help with the bioanalyzer analysis. We apologize to
all authors whose work we were unable to cite due to space limitations.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Designed research: C.A.N., J.B., C.M.O., S.F.S., N.H., R.U.H., S.Y., J.P., J.S.; M.M., S.L.C.-W.
Performed research: J.B., S.F.S., C.A.N., N.H., N.B., S.D.W., N.Y., K.B., and C.M. Hardware
design and optimization: C.K., A.Y., C.S., and T.C. Science payload mission manage-
ment and support: K.S., N.R., D.L., A.L., R.R.D., R.J.F., C.K., A.Y., C.S., and T.C. Analyzed
data: J.B., N.H., S.Y., N.B., C.A.N.; R.U.H. Wrote the paper: J.B. Edited paper: J.B., C.A.N.,
C.M.O., S.Y., N.H., K.S., and R.U.H.
FUNDING
NASA Space Biology NNX09AH40G, 80NSSC18K1478.
COMPETING INTERESTS
C.A.N is the Editor-in-Chief for npj Microgravity, C.M.O is Deputy Editor, J.B. is an
Associate Editor and K.S. is on the Editorial board.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00136-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.A.N.
J. Barrila et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
J. Barrila et al.
10
npj Microgravity (2021)  9 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
