Citation: Drago-Ferrante, R.; Di
Fiore, R.; Karouia, F.; Subbannayya,
Y.; Das, S.; Aydogan Mathyk, B.; Arif,
S.; Guevara-Cerdán, A.P.; Seylani, A.;
Galsinh, A.S.; et al. Extraterrestrial
Gynecology: Could Spaceﬂight
Increase the Risk of Developing
Cancer in Female Astronauts? An
Updated Review. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2022, 23, 7465. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms23137465
Academic Editors: John Lawler and
Khaled Kamal
Received: 7 June 2022
Accepted: 4 July 2022
Published: 5 July 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
 
International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Review
Extraterrestrial Gynecology: Could Spaceﬂight Increase
the Risk of Developing Cancer in Female Astronauts?
An Updated Review
Rosa Drago-Ferrante 1,†, Riccardo Di Fiore 2,3,†
, Fathi Karouia 4,5,6
, Yashwanth Subbannayya 7
, Saswati Das 8,
Begum Aydogan Mathyk 9, Shehbeel Arif 10,11
, Ana Paula Guevara-Cerdán 12, Allen Seylani 13,
Aman Singh Galsinh 14
, Weronika Kukulska 14, Joseph Borg 15
, Sherif Suleiman 2,
David Marshall Porterﬁeld 16
, Andrea Camera 17
, Lane K. Christenson 18
, April Elizabeth Ronca 19,20,
Jonathan G. Steller 21,22
, Afshin Beheshti 23,24,*
and Jean Calleja-Agius 2,*
1
BioDNA Laboratories, Malta Life Sciences Park, SGN 3000 San Gwann, Malta; rosa.dragoferrante@biodna.net
2
Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, MSD 2080 Msida, Malta;
riccardo.diﬁore@um.edu.mt (R.D.F.); sherif.s.suleiman@um.edu.mt (S.S.)
3
Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology,
College of Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA
4
Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Exobiology Branch, NASA Ames Research Center,
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA; fathi.karouia@nasa.gov
5
Space Research Within Reach, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA
6
Center for Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA
7
Centre of Molecular Inﬂammation Research (CEMIR), Department of Clinical and Molecular
Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway;
yashwanth.subbannayya@ntnu.no
8
Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital,
New Delhi 110001, India; saswati.das@cghs.nic.in
9
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, HCA Healthcare/University of South Florida Morsani College of
Medicine GME, Brandon Regional Hospital, Brandon, FL 33511, USA;
begum.aydoganmathyk@hcahealthcare.com
10
The Cooper Neurological Institute, Cooper University Health Care, Cherry Hill, NJ 08002, USA;
sarif1@jhu.edu
11
The G.W.C. Whiting School of Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
12
Molecular and Cellular Biology, School of Biosciences, The University of Shefﬁeld, Western Bank,
Shefﬁeld S10 2TN, UK; apguevaracerdan1@shefﬁeld.ac.uk
13
School of Medicine, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA; allen.seylani@medsch.ucr.edu
14
School of Medicine, Medical Sciences and Nutrition, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3FX, UK;
a.singh.19@abdn.ac.uk (A.S.G.); w.kukulska.19@abdn.ac.uk (W.K.)
15
Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta,
MSD 2080 Msida, Malta; joseph.j.borg@um.edu.mt
16
Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA;
porterf@purdue.edu
17
Ordine dei Medici Chirurghi e degli Odontoiatri della Provincia di Brescia, 25124 Brescia, Italy;
a.camera@outlook.it
18
Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3075 HLSIC,
3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA; lchristenson@kumc.edu
19
NASA Ames Research Center, Space Biosciences Division, Moffett Field, CA 94568, USA;
april.e.ronca@nasa.gov
20
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27101, USA
21
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of California Irvine, Orange, CA 92868, USA;
jsteller@hs.uci.edu
22
Exploration Medical Capability Element, NASA Johnson Space Center, 2400 E NASA Parkway,
Houston, TX 77058, USA
23
KBR, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
24
Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
*
Correspondence: afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov (A.B.); jean.calleja-agius@um.edu.mt (J.C.-A.)
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23137465
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
2 of 31
Abstract: Outer space is an extremely hostile environment for human life, with ionizing radiation
from galactic cosmic rays and microgravity posing the most signiﬁcant hazards to the health of
astronauts. Spaceﬂight has also been shown to have an impact on established cancer hallmarks, pos-
sibly increasing carcinogenic risk. Terrestrially, women have a higher incidence of radiation-induced
cancers, largely driven by lung, thyroid, breast, and ovarian cancers, and therefore, historically, they
have been permitted to spend signiﬁcantly less time in space than men. In the present review, we
focus on the effects of microgravity and radiation on the female reproductive system, particularly
gynecological cancer. The aim is to provide a summary of the research that has been carried out
related to the risk of gynecological cancer, highlighting what further studies are needed to pave the
way for safer exploration class missions, as well as postﬂight screening and management of women
astronauts following long-duration spaceﬂight.
Keywords: space exploration; microgravity; space radiation; astronaut health; female reproductive
system; gynecological cancers
1. Introduction
Human spaceﬂight and deep space exploration are the aspirational activities of numer-
ous national space agencies including the European Space Agency (ESA), Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA), National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and
Canadian Space Agency (CSA), as well as many commercial and other private entities.
Studies to determine the long-term physiological responses and adaptation to the space
environment and further re-adaptation to the environmental conditions on Earth are of
crucial importance to the safety and health of the astronauts [1].
Beyond the stressors of getting to space, such as vibration and acceleration forces,
microgravity and radiation are the most signiﬁcant hazards during space travel [2]. There
are other sources of physiological and psychological stress during spaceﬂight, including
circadian shifting, dietary alterations, conﬁned spaces, and isolation [2]. The impact of
spaceﬂight and the cosmic environment on those organ systems essential to carry out tasks
in space (motor skills, cardiovascular system, and maintenance of overall bodily function)
and which are essential upon return to Earth, have received the majority of focus as they
relate to studies of astronaut health and wellbeing.
A long-standing concern has also been the effects of the cosmic environment on male
and female reproductive health including carcinogenesis of the primary reproductive
organs secondary to cosmic radiation exposure. However, this area of research lags behind.
Advances in molecular biology, genetics, oncology and radiotherapy have provided more
insights in recent years [2]; however, there is a paucity of research evaluating the risks
of gynecological cancers, ovarian insufﬁciency, or infertility following spaceﬂight. In
the present review, we focus on the effects of microgravity and radiation on the female
reproductive system, particularly gynecological cancer. The aim is to provide a summary
of what is known so far from studies conducted on Earth, together with the research
questions and challenges requiring further study to pave the way for safer exploration class
missions, as well as postﬂight screening and management of female astronauts following
long-duration spaceﬂight.
2. Space-Environmental Factors: Microgravity and Space Radiation
Space travel, the ﬁnal frontier, presents a challenge that few have faced before. Since
the ﬁrst ﬂight to space in 1961, ﬁve key threats to long-duration space travel have been
identiﬁed: distance from Earth, isolation and conﬁnement, hostile/closed environments,
gravity (or lack thereof), and radiation [3]. These are all areas of potentially signiﬁcant
concern during long-duration spaceﬂight. An exploration-class mission to Mars is expected
to last three years, all in an enclosed environment with a small crew [4,5]. At least one
of these three years would include transit time in deep space during which microgravity

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
3 of 31
and radiation exposures would be elevated compared to the Martian surface. Previous
literature highlights the harmful effects of such environments on several body systems,
including cardiac, neurological, and immune functioning [6,7]. In addition to the elevated
medical risks during exploration missions, triage and management of such conditions is
complicated by limited resources, ability to evacuate, and ground communication abilities.
The distance between the Earth base and Mars leads to a communication time delay of
around 5–20 min one-way. This can be a particular challenge as the expertise available on
Earth is no longer able to provide real-time assistance (as is the case for astronauts on the
International Space Station).
2.1. Microgravity
Microgravity (or reduced gravity) leads to complex biological and systemic-level
changes. Given that life has evolved and adapted to the presence of near-constant gravity
on Earth, these changes can have consequences [3]. When exposed to altered gravity,
these changes can be classiﬁed into short- or long-term effects. Over a few minutes of
spaceﬂight, astronauts may experience space motion sickness [8]. Over a longer period,
there can be remodeling of the cardiovascular and musculoskeletal systems [9]. The
effects of microgravity on human physiology have been extensively investigated with the
main goal of developing adequate countermeasures to minimize risks associated with
long-duration spaceﬂight. These microgravity effects have been shown to be signiﬁcant,
global, and ampliﬁed with mission duration and distance from Earth. In particular, those
associated with cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, neurological, and immune systems are
easily diagnosed and clinically observable upon return from space.
Microgravity may synergistically combine with other factors such as radiation, addi-
tionally compromising the health and safety of the astronauts. However, though much is
known about how microgravity can affect these bodily systems, research into sex/gender-
related differences in the response and adaption to spaceﬂight as well as how microgravity
can affect the female reproductive system is limited [10].
2.2. Space Radiation
Radiation (as waves or particles) is energy that can be classiﬁed as non-ionizing (e.g.,
radiowaves, microwaves, infrared) or ionizing (e.g., X- or gamma rays, protons, neutrons,
heavy ions). However, ionizing radiation is the most biologically active. While popular
culture imagines radiation stemming from nuclear meltdowns and atomic bombs like
Chernobyl or Hiroshima, in medical practice, ionizing radiation plays critical roles in both
imaging and cancer radiotherapies. In imaging, X-rays and computed tomography provide
critical information allowing clinicians to tailor further interventions. In contrast, when
used in radiotherapies, ionizing radiation can be used to target a tumor with a minimal
impact on surrounding tissue [11]. The total radiation dose is often delivered as a series of
fractionated doses over the span of 4–6 weeks. Even though the exact treatment protocol
varies depending upon the type and stage of the tumor itself, typical total doses used for
the treatment of gynecological cancers range from around 40–60 Gray (Gy) [12].
Ionizing radiation can impact the cells directly, where the particles impact a vital
target molecule and directly transfer their energy, or indirectly, where particles impact
other molecules, such as water, leading to longer lasting, very reactive free radicals. When
impacting DNA, ionizing radiation can cause single-strand or double-strand DNA breaks.
Double-strand DNA breaks, especially those caused by close single hits or high-energy hits,
are much harder to repair. Non-rejoined breaks can lead to cell death, while incorrectly
rejoined breaks can lead to mutation.
Space radiation has a complex impact on human tissues and is an etiological agent
for cancer, cardiovascular diseases, central nervous system impairment, radiation sickness,
and other harmful conditions [3,13]. The Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is a crucial protective
element. Given the nature of ionizing space radiation, an increased rate of carcinogenesis
is a primary concern for long-duration spaceﬂight [14]. While no increase in gynecologic

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
4 of 31
cancer risk has yet been revealed in the female astronaut population [15,16], as exploration
missions will be outside of low Earth orbit and for increasingly long durations, concern
remains regarding the effects of even a low-dose rate accumulating over time [17]. The
three main sources of ionizing space radiation are galactic cosmic radiation (GCR), solar
particle events (SPE), and the Van Allen radiation belt [18]. These exposures are exceedingly
different from terrestrial sources of radiation with respect to the type, energy transfer, dose
rate, and total dose.
Ionizing GCR is composed of 98% nuclei and 2% electrons and positrons and con-
stitutes a signiﬁcant part of the total radiation dose [19]. The nuclear component itself
is composed of hydrogen (87%; i.e., protons), helium (12%), and heavy metal nuclei (1%;
including lithium, carbon, oxygen, silicon, iron, etc.) [20]. These energetically charged
particles are accelerated to relativistic speeds by intra-galactic supernovae [21]. During
this process, the protons and heavy-metal ions are stripped of their orbital electrons. Thus,
the role of personal and spacecraft shielding will be particularly important. Electrons and
positrons do not pose a major biological hazard as spacecraft shielding is sufﬁcient to
stop these particles. However, the high-energy particles (HZEs, protons, and heavy ions)
are energetic enough to penetrate the shielding materials used in spacecrafts [22]. Just as
these particles penetrate spacecraft shields, they also penetrate the body, raising concerns
regarding the long-term health effects of GCR exposure [23].
Linear Energy Transfer (LET) is the amount of energy a particle delivers along this
penetrating path to the material it travels through [24]. The value of LET determines how
the particles interact with cells. The LET value is also directly proportional to how deep
the particle will be able to travel. Thus, high LET radiation particles reach deeper tissues
than low LET radiation particles. For example, HZEs and protons generally have high LET
values as they have high energy [13,25,26]. Therefore, they are highly penetrating. This
makes them very damaging to biological tissue [27,28]. It is this high-density penetrating
nature that allows for these particles to induce complex double-strand breaks [13,25].
Given these differences, the International Commission on Radiological Protection created
weighting factors to relate different types of radiation to cancer mortality risks (Table 1) [29].
While these weighting factors may be problematic for understanding radiation exposures in
space, a conservative assumption is that a given dose of heavy ion irradiation, for example,
may be at least 20 times as harmful as a given dose of x- or gamma irradiation terrestrially.
Table 1. Types of radiation and the radiation weighting factor.
Type of Radiation
Radiation Weighting Factor (WR)
X-rays/Gamma rays
1
Electrons
1
Protons
2–5
Neutrons
5–20
Heavy ions
20
Importantly, not only do these particles penetrate spacecraft shielding and bodily
tissues, but they also interact with them, leading to the generation of secondary neutron
radiation and reactive oxygen species, which can be just as, if not more, biologically
harmful than the primary GCR particles. All of these details lead to a complex radiation
environment onboard mission spacecraft, adding to the challenge of protecting astronauts
from the ionizing effects of space radiation [23,30].
Of additional concern within the interplanetary radiation environment beyond the
constant exposure to GCR is the relationship between solar cycles, solar wind, and solar
particle events to the overall exposure [31]. Solar particle events (SPEs) occur when particles
emitted from the sun are accelerated, either close to the sun or in interplanetary space.
These particles consist of mainly 95% protons, electrons, HZE ions, and alpha particles [32].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
5 of 31
However, unlike GCR, SPE radiation is of high ﬂux and low energy. Thus, spacecraft
shielding is much more effective at blocking SPE radiation and most residual SPE radiation
can be absorbed by superﬁcial tissues. Skin doses of SPE are 5–10× higher than that of
internal organs and are therefore more likely to cause skin lesions and hematological and
immunological disturbances [19,23]. While SPEs can range in size, they rarely result in
high total dose exposures.
Furthermore, the exposure is different between the low Earth orbit (LEO) and beyond-
LEO environment during interplanetary travel, which will also be different from that on
the Mars surface. Deﬁned as 80–2000 km above Earth’s surface (and below the Van Allen
Belts), the radiation environment in LEO is starkly different to that beyond LEO. The LEO
is naturally shielded by Earth’s atmosphere and magnetic ﬁeld. Although there can be
increases in solar radiation during rare large solar particle events and coronal mass ejections
(CMEs), we are largely protected from the majority of GCR [28]. In comparison to the
~1 mGy/year at sea level, estimates of around 0.3–1 mGy/day have been suggested to
occur in deep space [30,33]. The projected dose received during a Mars mission (6 months
of travel each way and 2 years of surface stay) could therefore result in a total cumulative
dose equivalent close to 1000 mGy [17]. More recently, with radiation dosimeter readings
during the cruise phase of the Mars Curiosity mission, we can expect trans Earth–Mars
exposures up to 1.8 mGy/day [34]. Still, these can be subject to change based on local
conditions and extreme events such as solar ﬂares.
All of these unique features of space radiation make it very difﬁcult to extrapolate
conclusions from terrestrial radiation research for hypothesizing risk proﬁles in the space
environment. The majority of data are derived from human studies in which inadvertent
exposures to high total dose or high-dose rate, short-duration exposures to gamma irra-
diation that have occurred after nuclear events, or exposures in patients being treated for
existing cancer with high-dose rate external beam radiation or internal gamma radiation
(brachytherapy) or in non-human mammalian studies have been analyzed. However, the
vast majority of animal studies use X-ray and gamma irradiation, which are equivalent to
GCR exposures. Moreover, X-ray and gamma irradiation exposures predicted to be seen
in spaceﬂight are not of clinical signiﬁcance. Studies completed at Brookhaven National
Laboratory, where researchers can simulate GCR by using a mix-beam of protons and heavy
ions, provides a mechanism to study exposures in model mammalian systems. However,
these studies are also limited to using a small number of high fractionated doses to achieve
a desired total dose for exploration missions, because it would not be feasible to run daily
low-dose rate exposures for long durations in order to replicate a 3-year Mars mission.
In summary, to try and predict the risk of gynecologic cancer during or following space-
ﬂight, we must understand that with the exception of true long-duration human spaceﬂight
studies, our current knowledge is severely limited by the characteristics of the study. These
characteristics include radiation type, energy transfer, dose rate/duration of exposure,
total dose, animal model, presence of atmosphere, presence of magnetosphere, personal
shielding, craft/dwelling shielding, and use of antioxidants or other countermeasures.
3. Effect of Spaceﬂight on Female Reproduction
There is a paucity of evidence highlighting the effects of microgravity, space radiation,
and spaceﬂight on the male and female reproductive systems, with signiﬁcantly less for the
female system based on the lack of women being exposed to GCR in the Apollo missions
and past inequities. Most of our current knowledge on the female reproductive system
stems from animal studies and are summarized in Figure 1. Notably, the past decade has
witnessed a dramatic increase in the number of women living and working in space. NASA
astronaut candidate class ratios of men to women have achieved parity since 2013, making
it likely that the future of long-duration spaceﬂight may also feature equal numbers of men
and women [16], thus warranting further study into how the cosmic environment affects
reproductive health.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
6 of 31
Figure 1. A summary of the effects of microgravity, space radiation, and space ﬂight on the female
reproductive system.
3.1. Microgravity
Microgravity exposure poses multiple female reproductive health concerns. These
include effects of weightlessness on gonadal function and fertility as well secondary space-
ﬂight stressors, such as sleep disruption, that may degrade female reproductive health
during and after spaceﬂight. However, the scientiﬁc literature on reproductive changes
in female astronauts during and after spaceﬂight or exposure to simulated microgravity
(bedrest) remains sparse [10,16,35]. While female astronauts have successfully conceived
and born children after spaceﬂight, detailed information on post-spaceﬂight fertility, preg-
nancy complications, and birth outcomes in women is not available. Further, female
astronauts tend to delay pregnancy, making it difﬁcult to separate the effects of spaceﬂight
stressors from maternal aging on fertility and pregnancy outcomes. However, some animal
studies attempting to understand reproductive outcomes in spaceﬂight have occurred, the
ﬁrst was in 1979 aboard an 18.5-day COSMOS 1129 mission, where a barrier between the
two male and ﬁve female rats was removed on day two of orbit to allow for mating. Upon
return to Earth, no pregnancies were observed. However, no pregnancies were observed
in the control group of rats maintained on Earth either. It is not clear whether the absence
of pregnancy was due to an inability to copulate in the weightless space environment, or
to secondary more complex endocrine and/or embryonic developmental causes, or even
attributable to housing/caging concerns [35,36].
Studies of female mice that were maintained on the International Space Station (ISS)
for 37 days prior to euthanasia in space (eliminating re-entry stressors) revealed evidence
that these female mice could be detected at different stages of the estrous cycle post-mortem,
suggesting that some females were likely exhibiting estrous cyclicity [37]. Mouse embryos
ﬂown on China’s SJ-10 biosatellite completed a series of cell divisions leading to blastocoel
morphology during spaceﬂight, but both the rate of blastocyst formation and blastocyst
quality were impaired [38]. Severe DNA damage was observed in the embryonic cells, and
the genome of the blastocysts developed in space was globally hypomethylated with a
unique set of differentially methylated regions (DMRs). The authors suggest that these
changes are similar to developmental defects, DNA damage, and epigenetic abnormalities
that occur with exposure to ground-based low-dose radiation. However, given the dra-
matic differences already noted between cosmic radiation and that of gamma irradiation
that they used in their experiments, as well as to the inability to separate out the effects
of microgravity from the impact of space radiation in these studies, much remains to
be determined.
While a large effort in understanding fertility outcomes is still needed, a few studies
have been performed evaluating mammalian pregnancy and embryonic/prenatal develop-

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
7 of 31
ment in space [39]. In 1982, COSMOS 1514 examined the effect of a 4.5-day ﬂight exposure
on gestational days 13–18 of a 21-day rat pregnancy. Dams were euthanized immediately
upon landing and the fetuses exhibited neurobiological aberrations and impaired bone
development. Four of ﬁve dams successfully delivered their litters postﬂight. Additional
ﬁndings included poor maternal weight gain and evidence of fetal growth restriction in
comparison to controls, possibly related to the potato diet used to provision both water
and food, but no change in litter dynamics. Male and female offspring from these litters
that developed to adulthood were fertile and reproduced successfully. In 1994 and 1996,
two jointly sponsored NASA-National Institutes of Health missions (NIH.R1) (STS-66) and
NIH.R2 (STS-70) launched pregnant (gestational day 9 and 11, respectively) dams that
were returned to Earth on gestational day 20 prior to parturition. Space-ﬂown pregnant
rats gave birth at the expected time; however, they exhibited twice as many ‘lordosis’
contractions during labor coupled with decreased uterine myometrial connexin 43 (gap
junction) protein expression relative to controls, suggesting changes to the uterine smooth
musculature tone with exposure to microgravity. However, the duration of labor, maternal
weight gain, miscarriage/stillbirth rate, litter size, neonatal birthweight, placentophagia,
and maternal care patterns were not signiﬁcantly different from ground controls [40,41].
Importantly, NIH.R1 and R2 offspring were ﬂown for the second half of the rats’ gestational
period, after organogenesis was complete, and returned to Earth for parturition. There have
been no additional studies of mammalian pregnancy during spaceﬂight, and no mammal
has yet given birth in space. Few studies have investigated rodent pregnancy utilizing
terrestrial analogs for microgravity although past studies have exposed reproducing adult
rodents to hypergravity produced via chronic acceleration [42–44]. This work provides
strong evidence that, for some reproductive parameters such as pregnancy outcome and
mammary gland metabolism, gravity load elicits a response continuum, and a single study
compared responses to spaceﬂight and hypergravity. Analysis of mammary glands from
G20 dams revealed a strong negative correlation between metabolic rate and gravity loads
spanning 0, 1.5, 1.75, and 2 g. Approximately 98% of the variation in glucose oxidation and
94% of the variation in glucose incorporation into lipids was accounted for by differences
in gravity ‘dose’. These data demonstrate a remarkable continuum of response across the
microgravity and hypergravity environments for this reproductive parameter.
As reproductive factors such as age at ﬁrst pregnancy, parity, and breastfeeding are
all inversely linked with gynecologic and breast cancers terrestrially [45–47], more studies
will be needed to explore any link between reproductive ﬁtness after spaceﬂight and future
risks of cancer occurring in these same organs.
3.2. Hormonal Modalities in Spaceﬂight
A unique operational consideration for premenopausal female astronauts is the use
of hormonal contraception to suppress ovarian function, prevent pregnancy, and reduce
menstrual ﬂow or induce amenorrhea during pre-ﬂight training and spaceﬂight. With the
pathway that astronauts follow to reach candidate selection and the mission training phase,
female astronaut candidates often opt to use hormonal contraception through the phases
of candidate selection and training, while awaiting mission selection, during mission-
speciﬁc training, and during the mission itself, potentially amounting to 11 or more years
of reproductive suppression [48]. The combined oral contraceptive pill and levonorgestrel
intrauterine device are the most commonly used hormonal contraceptive options.
However, it is difﬁcult to predict how hormonal contraception use in combination
with the complex deep space environmental exposure will affect female astronaut health as
it relates to the intertwined nature of reproductive function on multiple organ systems. It is
unknown how the environment of deep space, especially for long durations, will impact the
shelf-life, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of the contraceptive agents as well as
contraceptive efﬁcacy, menses/abnormal uterine bleeding, ovarian cysts/torsion, venous
thromboembolism, cardiovascular health, musculoskeletal health during exploration-class
missions, or indeed gynecological cancers.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
8 of 31
3.3. Space Radiation
The likelihood of a signiﬁcant acute exposure that would lead to acute radiation
syndrome while a crew is in LEO is very low. However, the likelihood of an acute high-
dose radiation exposure is higher for a crew traveling in interplanetary space in a minimally
shielded spacecraft. As previously mentioned, SPEs of sufﬁcient intensity to breach clinical
thresholds during a trip to Mars have been recorded in the recent past. Tissue sensitivity
depends on the cellular, extracellular, and stroma composition of the tissue. In general,
tissues that have a large number of active stem cells are highly sensitive to radiation,
whereas tissues with mainly terminally differentiated or with large amounts of supporting
stroma and noncellular elements are relatively radioresistant.
In females, the ovary is extremely radiosensitive. Radiation-induced cessation of
hormone production can lead to temporary or permanent infertility. The vagina is similar
to other mucous membranes in terms of radiosensitivity, but the vulva, labia, and clitoris
are more radiosensitive. The uterus is radioresistant. Transient sterility can occur after
doses as low as 1250 mGy, although most report the threshold dose for temporary sterility
as being 1700 mGy [49]. The dose required for permanent sterility in women ranges from
3500–20,000 mGy (Table 2), with lower doses needed for women older than 40 years [50,51].
Radiation damage to the female gonads is cumulative because gametogenesis essentially
stops at the time of birth.
Table 2. Radiation effects on female reproductive function.
Age
Dose, mGy
Effect
All ages
1700
Temporary sterility lasting 1–3 years
1250–1500
Amenorrhea in 50%
3200–6250
Permanent sterility
Ages 15–40
1250–2500
Temporary amenorrhea
2500–5000
Ovulary suppression in 40–100%
5000–8000
Permanent ovulary suppression in 40–100%
8000–20,000
Permanent ovulary suppression in 100%
4. Effect of Space Travel on Cancer
Carcinogenesis is the multi-step transformation of normal cells into malignant tumors,
requiring the accumulation of several genetic and epigenetic aberrations. Cancer is charac-
terized by the continuous proliferation of tumor cells, accompanied by resistance to cell
death, induction of angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis [52].
DNA mutations altering protein-coding genes and signal transduction pathways are
among the factors involved in cancer etiology. The protein-coding gene mutations involve
tumor-suppressor genes, transmembrane proteins, platelet-derived growth factors, sex
hormones, components of the insulin-like growth factor axis, transcription factors of the
forkhead/winged helix-box transcription factor (Fox), and the SMAD families. Signal
transduction pathways that are involved in carcinogenesis include sonic hedgehog (SHH),
Wnt, and Notch [2]. There are also viruses like the human papillomavirus (HPV), Epstein–
Barr virus, and Hepatitis B and C, which are oncogenic [53]. Recent advances in the ﬁeld
of tumor biology are highlighting the role of the microenvironment and the altered stress
response favoring overall survival [54].
There are multiple environmental factors, such as space radiation and microgravity,
which can contribute to possibly increasing any risk of tumor development and the possible
underlying cellular mechanisms associated with spaceﬂight [55]. In addition to the studies
reviewed in Moreno-Villanueva and Wu [55], more investigations involving microgravity
and radiation have been carried out, as shown in Table 3 [56–63] and Table 4 [64–73],
respectively. Although ionizing radiation is a known carcinogen, irradiation with particles

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
9 of 31
in space differs quantitatively and qualitatively from γ-radiation or X-rays [30]. This
limits our understanding of the risk of carcinogenesis, which may be possibly associated
with space radiation. The biological effects of irradiation with heavy ions leading to
DNA damage and repair, genomic instability, mutagenesis, chromosome aberrations, and
neoplastic transformation have been documented [74]. Mouse models have generally
been used for studying radiation-induced carcinogenesis, but these do not reﬂect the full
range of complexity of cancer in humans [75]. Indeed, one main limitation for quantifying
space-associated cancer risk is that there are no human data from extended exposure to
space radiation, and in fact, estimation of carcinogenic risk for humans exposed to cosmic
radiation is very difﬁcult to ascertain [76,77].
Table 3. List of studies showing effects of microgravity on cancers.
Cancer Type
Microgravity Model
Model
Effect
Study
Breast cancer
6 min of r-µg *; PF **
maneuvers
MCF-7 cell line
Rearrangement of F-actin and tubulin,
appearance of ﬁlopodia- and
lamellipodia-like structures;
PF-induced differential regulation of
KRT8, RDX, TIMP1, CXCL8 (up), VCL,
and CDH1 (down) genes
Nassef et al.,
2019 [56]
Breast cancer
Exposure to an RPM ##
MCF-7 cell line
Cells formed multicellular spheroids
resembling epithelial ducts;
microgravity-induced differential
regulation of IL8, VEGFA, FLT1, ESR1
(up), ACTB, TUBB, FN1, CASP9,
CASP3, and PGR1 (down) genes
Kopp et al.,
2016 [57]
Breast cancer
PF ** maneuvers;
incubator RPM ##
MDA-MB-231 cells
Differential regulation of ICAM1,
CD44, ERK1, NFKB1, FAK1 (up),
ANXA2, and BAX (down) genes
Nassef et al.,
2019 [58]
Glioma
Exposure to an RPM ##
U251 cells
Induction of apoptosis; reduced
FAK/RhoA/Rock and FAK/Nek2
signaling events
Deng et al.,
2019 [59]
Lung cancer (non
small cell)
Exposure to an RPM ##
NCI-H1703
(CRL-5889) cells
Formation of multicellular spheroids;
spherical rearrangement of actin
ﬁlaments in the outer region of
cytoplasm; increased apoptosis,
upregulation of TP53, CDKN2A, RB1,
PTEN, and SOX2 in stimulated
adherent cells
Dietz et al.,
2019 [60]
Melanoma
Exposure to a 3-D
Clinostat #
A375 cells
Decreased cell viability; increase in
caspase 3/7 activity; reduced cell
proliferation; change in cell
morphology (presence of membrane
blebbing lamellipodia, and stress
ﬁbers, absence of ﬁlopodia)
Przystupski
et al., 2021 [61]
Thyroid cancer
Exposure to an RPM ##
FTC-133 cells
Cells formed multicellular spheroids;
differential regulation of ERK1, EGF
(up), CTGF, and CAV (down) genes in
multicellular spheroids
Warnke et al.,
2014 [62]
Thyroid cancer
10 day of r-µg *
FTC-133 cells
Differential expression of IL6, IL7, IL8,
VEGF, TIMP1, MMP3, CCL4, and B2M
(up) proteins
Riwaldt et al.,
2015 [63]
* r-µg: real microgravity; # s-µg: simulated microgravity; ** PF: parabolic ﬂight; ## RPM: Random Positioning
machine (simulated microgravity).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
10 of 31
Table 4. List of studies showing effects of space radiation on cancer risk.
Cell Type
Radiation Model
Cell/Animal Model
Effect
Study
Lung cells
Iron ion (Fe) beam
(180 MeV/nucleon;
LET 300 keV/µm) for
0.1 Gy
SV40-immortalized
human bronchial
epithelial cells (NL20)
Progeny of Fe-irradiated cells showed
elevated micronucleus formation,
increased markers for DNA
double-strand breaks (γ-H2AX foci),
reduced cell proliferation, persistent
oxidative stress, and increased
colony formation.
Cao et al.,
2018 [64]
Lung cells
56Fe (600 MeV/u at 0,
0.1, 0.3, 1.0 Gy) and
28Si (300 MeV/u at 0,
0.3, 1.0 Gy) high
LET irradiation
Immortalized human
bronchial epithelial cell
line (HBEC3-KT)
Global differential CpG island
methylation in response to 56Fe and
28Si ion exposure suggests a lasting
impact on the epigenome relevant to
lung cancer
Kennedy et al.,
2018 [65]
Hematopoietic
stem cells
100 cGy of 1000 MeV/n
protons (LET
0.23 keV/micron); 28Si
300 MeV/n ions (LET
70 keV/micron)
Mlh1+/−mice (B6.129-
Mlh1tm1Rak/NCI)
representing loss of
MLH1 that occurs in
human hematopoietic
stem cells with age
High LET 28Si ion irradiation affected
hematopoietic stem cell differentiation;
high LET irradiation caused early and
higher incidence of tumorigenesis in
Mlh1 heterozygous mice; frequent
occurrence of T-cell rich B-cell (TRB)
lymphomas with altered mismatch
repair pathway
Patel et al.,
2020 [66]
Spleen cells
0.5 Gy Proton
irradiation (1-GeV; LET
0.24-keV/µm)
Murine Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC)
cells-bearing
C57BL/6 mice
Upregulation of genes involved in
DNA repair and cell cycle, including
CDK2, MCM7, CD74, and RUVBL2
Wage et al.,
2015 [67]
Intestinal cells
56Fe-irradiation
(1.6 Gy; energy-
1000 MeV/nucleon;
LET-148 keV/µm)
Intestinal tissue from
Female C57BL/6J mice
56Fe-irradiation upregulated
metabolites belonging to prostanoid
biosynthesis and eicosanoid signaling
pathways linked with cellular
inﬂammation, which has been
associated with intestinal
inﬂammatory disease and
colon cancer
Cheema et al.,
2014 [68]
Liver cells
56Fe ion irradiation
(1 GeV/nucleon)
CBA/CaJ mice
Higher incidence of hepatocellular
carcinoma than γ-irradiated mice
Weil et al.,
2009 [69]
Kidney cells
56Fe ions irradiation
(1 GeV/amu,
151 keV/µm)
Aprt heterozygous
(Aprt+/−)
B6D2F1 mice
Increased mutant frequencies leading
to DNA damage
Turker et al.,
2017 [70]
Cervical cancer
cells
Kept at the Russian Mir
space station (40 days);
American space shuttle
(10 days)
HeLa cells
DNA damage
Ohnishi et al.,
2002 [71]
Normal human
foreskin
ﬁbroblast cells
Kept at the
International Space
Station (14 days)
AG1522 cells
Larger size γ-H2AX foci suggest
DNA damage
Lu et al.,
2017 [72]
Normal human
foreskin
ﬁbroblast cells
Kept at the
International Space
Station (14 days)
AG1522 cells
Downregulation of miRNA Let-7a,
which was found to be downregulated
to γ ray and UV ray radiation in
another study
Zhang et al.,
2016 [73]
The standard approach for analyzing carcinogenesis is via relative biological effective-
ness (RBE) studies utilizing low LET to high LET scaling factors. In addition, radiation
effects ratio (RER) is a new metric that is being proposed, which compares the effects of
two radiations at the same dose [78]. However, there are still important dilemmas regard-

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
11 of 31
ing cancer risk at low-dose rates [79,80]. Therefore, in order to improve the estimation
of carcinogenesis risk of long-duration space travel, there needs to be more mechanistic
analysis and biological insight of radiation quality effects and long-duration exposure to
low radiation dose rates. The relationship between multiple space–environmental factors
that can inﬂuence the development of cancer should be investigated separately and also
in combination.
To date, there have been a limited number of studies investigating the combined
effect of space radiation and microgravity on cancer development. Recent ﬁndings suggest
that the antiproliferative effect of simulated microgravity may lead to novel therapeutic
strategies in combating cancer. In contrast, an impaired radiation-induced DNA damage re-
sponse that can promote tumor initiation has been observed under microgravity conditions
in vitro [55]. In studies using devices that simulate microgravity, a microgravity-associated
increased radiosensitivity has been reported. However, there are currently minimal data re-
garding the effect of spaceﬂight on the capacity of the cells to repair any artiﬁcially induced
DNA damage. Moreover, experiments investigating DNA damage response in simulated
microgravity are not always concordant with those conducted in real microgravity [81].
Beyond the concerns of radiation-induced DNA damage, numerous molecular studies
add to the hypothesis that individualized risk could be increased in the setting of micrograv-
ity, as important signaling pathways commonly involved in carcinogenesis could also be
dysregulated under microgravity conditions. One example includes the phosphoinositide-3
kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway [82–84], which is a key driver of metabolism, cell survival,
and proliferation in response to growth factor stimulation [85].
Sex-speciﬁc cancers (involving the breast, ovary, or uterus) together contribute heavily
to overall cancer incidence and mortality in women. Breast cancer is the largest contributor
to cancer incidence following terrestrial radiation and the three organs combined make
up over 30% of the risk of exposure-induced cancer. Breast cancer is also the second
largest contributor to cancer mortality following terrestrial radiation, and the three organs
combined make up over 20% of the risk of exposure-induced death. Both ovarian and
uterine cancers have 5-year survival rates of 49.1% and 66.3%, respectively.
Colorectal, breast, prostate, and lung cancer cells have been studied in simulated
microgravity in relation to the dysregulation of the PI3K pathway. In colorectal cancer cells
exposed to simulated microgravity in a Rotational Cell Culture System-High Aspect Ratio
Vessel (RCCS-HARV), Akt phosphorylation was found to decrease whilst PTEN expression
and activity increased, leading to the induction of apoptosis [86]. Similarly, apoptosis rate
was seen to increase in lung cancer cells exposed to simulated microgravity, as tumor-
suppressor genes were upregulated when cells were cultured in a random-positioning
machine (RPM), and AKT3 and PIK3CA expression remained unaltered.
Interestingly, a study carried out on normal and cancerous breast cells found that
the paradox between weightlessness-induced apoptosis and Akt upregulation under mi-
crogravity conditions depends on whether the cells are adhered or detached. It has been
concluded that survival strategies under this type of mechanical stress vary between cell
types. They do in fact observe that apoptosis occurs in the cancerous cell line growing
in ﬂoating organoid-like structures after 72 h due to major cytoskeletal rearrangements
happening as a result of the simulated loss of gravity using an RPM [87]. These ﬁndings
are supported by the study carried out on prostate cancer cells cultured in an RPM; Hybel
et al. also reported that cells adhered to the culture ﬂask signiﬁcantly upregulated genes
of the PI3K pathway, such as Akt and mTOR, and ﬂoating cells that formed multicellular
spheroids downregulated these [88]. However, it remains unclear how accurately the
different methods used to simulate microgravity reﬂect the results that would be observed
in tissues under real microgravity, and how different equipment may affect experimental
reproducibility, as conﬂicting results have often been reported in the past [89].
There is no deﬁnitive evidence of increased rates of carcinogenesis amongst astronauts
exposed to space radiation in comparison to terrestrial controls (likely because of their
overall excellent health pre-ﬂight, low overall doses experienced to date, and very small

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
12 of 31
sample sizes) [90]. However, it is reasonable to assume that space radiation would increase
an astronaut’s individualized risk [30]. Furthermore, when reviewing astronaut and analog
populations of aircrews exposed to cosmic radiation, Di Trolio et al. concluded that it was
unclear whether increased exposure to cosmic radiation was directly linked to carcinogenic
risk or whether the risk may be more attributable to lifestyle factors [91].
5. Gynecological Cancers and Space
5.1. Brief Overview on Gynecological Cancers
Gynecological cancers (GCs) arise in the female reproductive organs and include tubo-
ovarian, uterine/endometrial, cervical, vaginal, and vulvar cancers [92]. GCs pose a serious
global health burden due to their high incidence among women of all ages [93]. There is
a high mortality rate among women with GCs, which can be attributed to several factors
including lack of screening, limited awareness of speciﬁc symptoms, or even misdiagnosis.
In advanced GCs, delayed diagnosis, together with limited treatment options, are
major contributing factors leading to high mortality. In the case of rare GCs (for example
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, malignant germ-cell tumors, sex cord-stromal tumors,
vaginal/vulvar carcinoma, etc.), these issues are even more problematic [94]. These tumors
are generally associated with an overall poor prognosis. The low incidence of each of these
rare tumors, with an annual incidence of <6 per 100,000 women, poses a major hurdle in
the management of patients due to limited therapy options [93].
Considerable studies have shown that the occurrence and development of GCs are
related to the inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes, the activation of oncogenes, and the
activation of abnormal cell signaling pathways. In addition, epigenetic processes regulate
gene expression through histone modiﬁcation, DNA methylation, and noncoding RNA,
thereby playing a central role in the occurrence and development of GCs [95].
Ovarian cancer (OC) is an umbrella term for a heterogeneous group of tumors that
are very diverse behaviorally, morphologically, and molecularly. Up to 90% of OCs are of
epithelial origin [96]. OC is commonly associated with alterations in BRCA1/2 and TP53,
both of which are linked with a poor prognosis [97–99]. Typically, the onset is insidious,
with no speciﬁc clinical symptoms in the early stage of the disease. To date, there is a paucity
of sensitive and effective clinical screening tools for OC, with approximately 70% of cases
being diagnosed at an advanced stage [100]. According to the American Cancer Society,
in the United States alone, approximately 21,000 new cases of OC are diagnosed annually,
accounting for 5% of all female malignancies, with a mortality rate of 62% and a ﬁve-year
survival rate of 20–30% [101]. Thus, there is an urgent need for highly sensitive and speciﬁc
diagnostic tools that identify OC at an earlier stage together with the development of new
therapeutic approaches to improve patient survival rate.
Worldwide, cervical cancer (CC) is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths
in women [102]. Clinically, CC is associated with persistent infection with ‘high-risk’ hu-
man papillomaviruses (HPVs), particularly the subtypes HPV16 and HPV18 [103,104]. In
addition, a number of other risk factors have been associated with CC, including early
sexual activity [105], multiple sexual partners [106], other viral infections (such as HIV,
herpes simplex virus type II), chlamydia infections [107], genetic factors (active onco-
genes, including PIK3CA, ATAD2, and CRNDE; tumor-suppressor genes, including TP53,
RASSF1A, and NOL7) [108], and tobacco use [109]. For the detection of pre-invasive cervical
disease, Papanicolaou smears and liquid-based cytology were historically utilized as the
main screening tests [110]; however, there is currently a shift in practice underway to-
wards primary human papillomavirus (HPV) screening. Despite the continuous advances
in treatment, including radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy together with surgery, early
lymph node metastasis can still occur in a number of patients with CC, leading to poor
prognosis. The ﬁve-year survival rate is still approximately 40% [111–114]. Although
the HPV-associated carcinogenic pathway of CC is now well elucidated, further in-depth
studies are necessary to aid in the discovery of novel molecular therapeutic targets that
would contribute to the management of patients with advanced or recurrent CC.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
13 of 31
Endometrial cancer (EC) is another common type of gynecological tumor, compris-
ing 4.8% of worldwide cancer incidence and 2.1% of mortality related to cancer [115,116].
Underlying risk factors are associated with high circulating levels of estrogen and include
early menarche, obesity, diabetes mellitus, Lynch syndrome, nulliparity, late menopause,
advanced age, breast cancer, tamoxifen therapy, and radiotherapy [117]. When consid-
ering both biological and clinical parameters, gene mutations are being used for EC
classiﬁcation [118]. EC can be divided into endometrioid (Type I), affecting approximately
80% of patients, and non-endometrioid (Type II) in the rest of the patients [119,120]. Non-
endometrioid ECs include clear-cell carcinoma, endometrial serous carcinoma, and car-
cinosarcoma. Type 1 ECs have alterations in different genes, including CTNNB1, PTEN,
KRAS, and DNA characterized by microsatellite instability (MSI) [121,122]. In contrast,
Type 2 EC tumors are deﬁned as having TP53 mutations, ampliﬁcation of HER2, increased
CDH1 expression, and a high Ki-67 (MIB1) score, which is a marker of proliferation. The
standard treatment is total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, which is
usually effective for stage I disease [123]. However, in advanced stages, surgery is followed
by radio- and/or chemotherapy. Despite advances in drugs and surgical treatments for EC,
survival rates have not improved signiﬁcantly. Thus, improving the ability to identify the
prognostic risk factors of EC and formulating reasonable new treatment plans are essential
for improving the prognosis and survival rate of patients with EC [124].
Vaginal and vulvar cancers are rare malignancies with similar estimated incidence and
mortality rates [125]. Due to the difﬁculty in performing large prospective randomized tri-
als in patients with these rare tumors, systemic chemotherapeutic regimens have generally
been extrapolated from experience in the management of CC. This is because these malig-
nancies share similar epidemiologic risk factors, are strongly associated with HPV infection
and are predominantly of the squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) histologic subtype [126–128].
However, vaginal and vulvar cancers can be challenging to treat particularly when disease
is not amenable to surgical resection or radiation [129]. There is currently no consensus on
effective treatment as response rates to systemic chemotherapeutic regimens are variable in
the recurrent setting for vaginal and vulvar SCC [129]. Additionally, given the tendency for
vaginal and vulvar SCC to develop later in life, treatment options may be further limited by
associated toxicity and co-morbidity [127,128]. Clinical and pathological prognostic factors
are constantly being explored in order to minimize unnecessary treatments especially in
elderly patients. Furthermore, new molecules are being investigated as targeted therapies
to increase patient survival.
Building on the previous knowledge about the individual and combined effects of radi-
ation and microgravity on cancer and tumor cell processes [130], the relatively few studies
on GCs in simulated space conditions that have been published to date will be described.
5.2. Effects of Microgravity and Radiation on Gynecological Cancers: In Vitro and In Vivo Studies
Microgravity has different effects on normal and cancer cells, but the related under-
lying mechanisms are still being elucidated. Experiments using normal or cancer cells
performed in space on the International Space Station (ISS) or under s-µg-conditions using
devices approved by ESA and NASA to create µg conditions on Earth (known as ground-
based facilities) [131], belong to a newly evolving area of research in oncobiology [132].
Numerous studies have demonstrated how a short- and long-term exposure to r- and
s-µg inﬂuences differentiation, proliferation, migration, survival, apoptosis, adhesion, and
other processes involved in carcinogenesis [53]. Space exploration missions also need to
have strategies in order to mitigate the potentially harmful exposure to galactic cosmic
radiation, which can cause cancer. Ongoing studies investigate these effects using cell- and
animal-based studies in low Earth orbit [133]. The costs and logistic challenges involved
when sending biological specimens to space have spearheaded the development of sur-
rogate ground-based radiation experiments to study the mechanisms of biological injury
and cancer risk. However, simulating galactic cosmic radiation has proven to be difﬁcult.
In fact, current studies are only partially succeeding at replicating the complexity of this

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
14 of 31
radiation and its downstream injury pathways [133]. The following section discusses the
few studies about various types of gynecological normal or cancer cells under conditions
of weightlessness and/or real/simulated galactic cosmic radiation (Tables 5 and 6). It is
important to keep in mind that studies of cancer cells in culture do not necessarily reﬂect
the actual tumor scenario in vivo.
5.2.1. Ovarian Normal and Cancer Cells Exposed to Microgravity and/or Radiation
Altered Gravity and Microgravity
In order to study cellular interactions involved in the growth and differentiation
of OC, a cell line, designated as LN1, was established from a mixed mullerian tumor
of the ovary [134]. This cell line was cultured on microcarrier beads in the high aspect
rotating-wall vessel (RWV), and the tumor cells readily proliferated without the need for
cocultivation with a supportive cell layer. Phase contrast light microscopy and scanning
electron microscopy showed the presence of three-dimensional multicellular aggregates
consisting of multiple cell-coated beads bridged together, as well as scattered aggregates
proliferating as spheroids free in suspension. This illustrates the ability of this culture
system to provide the biological conditions necessary for pluripotent cell growth [134].
The same group later demonstrated that the RWV culture system is suitable for in vitro
production of ovarian tumor cells with the same morphologic, oncogenic, and immunocy-
tochemical characteristics shown in vivo [135].
In another study, LN1 cells were cultured for 14 days on the ISS during Expedition 3.
When compared with ground controls, LN1 cells exposed to microgravity showed reduced
expression of vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen [136], as well as reduced expres-
sion of IL-6 and IL-8 [132]. Both of these cytokines are associated with the growth of several
types of tumors, including OC. Przystupski et al. showed that exposure to microgravity
affects the morphology of SKOV-3 cells, as well as drug efﬁciency. Altered cell shape, pres-
ence of membrane blebbing and lamellipodia, and lack of ﬁlopodia have been observed in
cells cultured on 3D-clinostat (3D-C). After exposure on the 3D-C with cisplatin, there was
an increase in apoptotic cells and G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in comparison to the static control
cells. Cell proliferation and migration were also altered after exposure to microgravity.
These ﬁndings suggest that the altered gravity conditions affect cellular mechanisms that
are involved in resistance to cisplatin. This is a crucial step towards understanding the
relationship between cellular resistance to chemotherapy and the response to micrograv-
ity [137]. An integrated set of systems biology tools and databases were collated together
by Mukhopadhyay et al., who analyzed more than 8000 molecular pathways on published
global gene expression datasets of human cells in microgravity. Interestingly, microgravity
alone may induce several cancer related signatures, including OC [138].
Radiation
In one particular experiment, six-week-old female B6C3F1 mice were exposed to
439 mGy heavy ion irradiation, as a 290 MeV/u carbon-ion beam (LET 10 keV/micron)
at 2 cm from the upper proximal point of a spread Bragg beam, and were autopsied
13.5 months after the irradiation [139]. The total tumor incidence was 32.3% (mainly OC),
in the irradiated group and 0% in the controls. These results indicate that heavy ion
irradiation can induce ovarian tumors in females.
The effects of heavy ion and X-ray irradiation on tumorigenesis in B6C3F1 mice were
investigated by exposure to 426 mGy heavy ion irradiation of 290 MeV/u carbon-ion beam
(LET 60–210 KeV/micron) at the dose rate of 400 +/−200 mGy/min, 500 mGy of X-ray
irradiation at 100 mGy/min, or 5000 mGy of X-ray irradiation at 1000 mGy/min [140].
Interestingly, in the females after 13.5 months of whole-body irradiation, tumorigenicity
was signiﬁcantly lower for heavy ion than for 500 mGy and 5000 mGy X-ray irradiation.
The incidences of OC (which was the main tumor), were 73%, 17%, and 41%, respectively.
These ﬁndings indicate that 426 mGy of heavy ion irradiation is associated with a lower
risk of inducing cancer than 5000 mGy of X-ray irradiation.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
15 of 31
In another experiment carried out to investigate the relationship between oocyte
apoptosis and ovarian tumors induced by high and low LET radiations, C57BL/6N mice
were exposed to 252Cf ﬁssion neutron (2.13 MeV), 1000 mGy monoenergetic neutrons (0.317,
0.525, and 1.026 MeV), or 137Cs g-rays at 7 days of age [141]. The cumulative apoptotic index
of oocytes was 65.6%, 77.9%, and 41.6% for the 2.13 MeV neutron, 0.525 MeV neutron, and g-
rays, respectively. Follicles with apoptotic pregranulosa cells were 18.3%, 53.0%, and 22.8%
of cumulative index for the three groups, respectively. Granulosa cell tumors developed
only in the g-ray groups (3.2% for 1000 mGy and 15.6% for 3000 mGy), whereas tubular
adenomas developed in the groups of g-ray (35.5%) and monoenergetic neutrons (26.1%).
In addition, partial-body irradiation with 3000 mGy g-rays to the ovaries induced granulosa
cell tumors in 27.3% of mice. These ﬁndings show that there is a higher effectiveness of
neutrons than g-rays to induce oocyte and pregranulosa cell apoptosis, which correlates
with the inhibition of the development of granulosa cell tumor.
Mishra et al. hypothesized that, in mice, charged iron particle irradiation induces
ovarian carcinogenesis. Three-month-old female mice were exposed to 0 mGy (sham) or
500 mGy iron ions at the Brookhaven National laboratory and euthanized at 18 months.
The 500 mGy irradiated mice showed signs of ovarian failure, with increased weight gain
and lack of estrous cycling. A total of 7% and 47% of mice irradiated with 500 mGy
had bilateral and unilateral ovarian tumors, respectively, whereas 14% of mice in the
0 mGy group had unilateral tumors. The tumors were tubular adenomas or mixed tubular
adenoma/granulosa cell tumors. Though conclusions are limited by the dose rate, this
study demonstrated a that space radiation analog can induce ovarian tumors in mice,
raising concerns about ovarian tumors as late sequelae of deep space travel in female
astronauts [142].
5.2.2. Cervical Normal and Cancer Cells Exposed to Microgravity and/or Radiation
Microgravity
In a study investigating the multicellular interaction between CC cell lines and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), which were grown in a RWV, it was found that
the co-culture presented tubular structures penetrating the tumor cell masses. This co-
culture formed aggregates larger in size than the monocultures, with increased cell mass and
number. This suggests that a RWV provides a new model that can be used to investigate
the regulatory factors that govern tumor angiogenesis [143]. Kelly et al. investigated
various cell types, including melanoma cells, prostate cancer cells, osteosarcoma cells, lung
cancer cells, and cervical carcinoma cells (HeLa) on the NASA-developed hydrofocusing
bioreactor (HFB) and the rotary cell culture system (RCCS). It has been demonstrated
that HFB exposure increased CD133-positive cell growth from various cell lines, when
compared with the RCCS vessel and normal gravity control [144].
Spaceﬂight Studies
So far, the majority of studies on spaceﬂight focus on normal cells and tissues. How-
ever, little is known of the effects of spaceﬂight on cancer cells. To investigate the potential
effects of the exposure of the space environment on cancer cells, one of the experiments
included sending human cervical carcinoma CaSki cells on “Shen Zhou IV” space shuttle
mission. The cell morphology and proliferation were investigated after ﬂying to ground.
The growth of CaSki cells in the ﬂight group was slow when compared with ground groups.
Light microscopy revealed differences in cell morphology between ground controls and
ﬂight groups, with the latter being characterized by smaller, rounder, smoother and low ad-
hesion cells. Furthermore, space-grown CaSki cells showed altered gene expression in genes
regulating the cell cycle, cell morphology, signal transduction, and apoptosis [145,146].
Radiation
In contrast to the numerous studies that have been conducted on the ground using
particles generated in accelerators, investigations on DNA damage from direct exposure

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
16 of 31
to natural space radiation are very limited. In one study, where ﬁxed human cervical
carcinoma (HeLa) cells were ﬂown in the Russian MIR space station for 40 days or on the
Space Shuttle for 9 days, the resulting DNA damage levels, as measured by enzymatic
incorporation of [3 H]-dATP from terminal deoxyribo-nucleotidyl transferase, correlated
with the space ﬂight duration. This suggests that the measured DNA damage was caused
by space radiation and was dependent on the duration of the space ﬂight [71]. However,
further experiments need to be performed in the true space environment in order to further
investigate and address this critical question.
Viral Reactivation
A potential inducer of gynecological cancers during space travel may be linked to
oncogenic virus reactivation. It has been reported that HPV is responsible for 4.5% of CCs
and 630,000 new cancer cases per year [147]. HPV can infect both genders and can also
cause anal, penis, vagina, vulva, and oropharynx cancers. Despite immune clearance, some
viral infections may persist in the latent phase and can cause reactivation or outbreaks. HPV
virus latency and reactivation has been widely documented in literature [148], and this re-
activation risk increases in women with co-infections, such as HIV and herpesviruses [149].
HPV and co-infection with HSV-2 have been reported in both cervical precancerous lesions
and invasive CCs with a prevalence of 13–30% [149]. There is also evidence of the Epstein–
Barr virus (EBV), human herpesvirus 4, as a cofactor in cervical pathologies. EBV has been
detected in CIN and CC cells [149].
In 2017, Mehta et al. reported reactivation of latent EBV, varicella-zoster virus, and
cytomegalovirus in a population of astronauts (male and female) as well as increased in viral
copy numbers during long-duration space travel in comparison to short-duration space
missions (10 to 16 days) [150]. During spaceﬂight, immune dysregulation, impaired NK cell
function, and reduced T cell activation have all been reported [151,152]. Both short- and
long-duration spaceﬂights can cause reactivation of the latent herpes virus infections [153].
In addition to the herpes virus, varicella zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and
EBV shedding increased in ISS missions [153].
Currently, it is unknown if spaceﬂight would alter the HPV clearance and/or reacti-
vation. Based on the current evidence of immune dysfunction and reactivation of some
viruses, HPV screening may need to be modiﬁed in the future, especially for longer du-
ration spaceﬂights. Up to 23% of astronaut candidates had a history of treated or current
cervical dysplasia. If research shows increased risk for reactivation of viruses like HPV in
spaceﬂight, these women may be at increased risk for CC [154].
5.2.3. Endometrial Normal and Cancer Cells Exposed to Microgravity and/or Radiation
Microgravity
The possible effect of simulated microgravity (SM) on the process of proliferation
and in vitro decidualization was investigated in primary human endometrial stromal cells
(eSCs) (Cho et al.). Following 36 h of exposure to SM, there was a decrease in the pro-
liferation and migration of eSCs, without inducing apoptosis and changes in cell cycle
progression. A decrease in the phosphorylation of Akt and levels of matrix metallopro-
teinase (MMP)-2 and FOXO3a were also observed, impeding autophagic ﬂux by reducing
the levels of autophagy-related genes. Overall, these results suggest that exposure to SM
decreases proliferation and migration in eSCs through Akt/MMP and FOXO3a/autophagic
ﬂux [155].
A three-dimensional (3D) cell culture model of human EC was established by Grun
et al., using a RCCS and appeared histologically similar to the primary tumors. This is likely
to be useful in the study of the molecular and biological mechanisms of endometrial tumor
progression and especially when testing novel molecular targets for cancer therapy [156].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
17 of 31
Radiation
The effect of space radiation on expression of apoptosis-related genes was investigated
in endometrial cells (HEC1B and AN3CA cells) by Palumbo et al., whereby cell death was
induced by monoenergetic protons (1000–10,000 mGy; LET 8.35 keV/µm and 4.86 MeV)
and γ-rays (200–1600 mGy) after irradiation for 4 h. Following exposure to 1000 mGy
protons and 400 mGy γ-rays, HEC1B cells underwent apoptosis, as assessed by presence
of PARP cleavage. However, this was not observed after higher doses, as cells were likely
to have progressed directly to necrosis. AN3CA cells, which are less differentiated than
HEC1B, did not undergo apoptosis, but underwent rapid necrosis following 10,000 mGy
proton radiation and above 200 mGy γ-radiation. Since the experiments included only
three replicates per group, with no statistical analyses, it is still unclear whether there is
greater potency of proton radiation compared to γ-radiation for these endpoints in uterine
carcinoma cells [157].
Table 5. Studies on effects of space ﬂight and simulated gravity on gynecological tissues.
Tissue Type
Microgravity/Space
Flight
Cell/Animal Models
Effect
Study
Ovarian
simulated microgravity
RWV
LN1 human ovarian
tumor cells
LN1 cells grew as spheroids free
in suspension
Becker et al., 1993;
Goodwin et al.,
1997 [134,135]
spaceﬂight
(cells were cultured on
the ISS)
LN1 human ovarian
tumor cells
Cells showed reduced expression of
VIM and EMA
Hammond et al.,
2005 [136]
simulated microgravity
3D-C
SKOV-3 human ovarian
cancer cells
Cells showed reduced proliferation,
migration, and higher sensitivity of
cancer cells to the cisplatin
Przystupski et al.,
2021 [137]
microgravity
set of systems-biology
tools and
databases
identiﬁed several cancer related
signatures induced by microgravity
Mukhopadhyay
et al., 2016 [138]
Cervical
simulated microgravity
RWV
Co-culture of HUVEC
and tumor primary
cells
Co-culture presented tubular
structures penetrating the tumor
cell masses,
Chopra et al.,
1997 [143]
simulated microgravity
HFB and RCCS
HeLa human cervical
cancer cells
HFB exposure increased
CD133-positive cell growth
Kelly et al.,
2010 [144]
spaceﬂight
(cells were ﬂown on
“Shen Zhou IV” space
shuttle mission)
Human cervical
carcinoma CaSki cells
Cells exhibited morphologic
differences, characterized by rounder,
smoother, decreased, smaller, and low
adhesion cells. Furthermore,
space-grown cells showed altered
gene expression that generally
corresponded to changes in genes
regulating the cell cycle, cell
morphology, apoptosis,
and signal transduction
Zhang et al., 2011;
Guo et al.,
2012 [145,146]
Endometrial
simulated microgravity
3D-C
human endometrial
stromal cells (eSCs)
Cells showed reduced proliferation
and migration. This was accompanied
by a simultaneous decrease in the
phosphorylation of Akt and the level
of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2
and FOXO3a.
Cho et al.,
2019 [156]
simulated microgravity
RCCS
Human tumor
primary cells
3D model endometrial cancer cell
culture was established
Grun et al.,
2009 [157]
Abbreviations: RWV: rotating-wall vessel; ISS: International Space Station; 3D-C: 3D-clinostat; VIM: vimentin;
EMA; epithelial membrane antigen; HUVEC: human umbilical vein endothelial cells; HFB: hydrodynamic
focusing bioreactor; RCCS: rotatory cell culture system.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
18 of 31
Table 6. Studies on effects of irradiation on gynecological tissues.
Tissue Type
Radiation Type
Cell/Animal Models
Effect
Study
Ovarian
0.439 Gy as a 290 MeV/u
carbon-ion beam (LET
10 keV/micron)
B6C3F1 mice
Induction of ovarian
tumors
Watanabe et al.,
1998 [139]
0.426 Gy heavy ion irradiation of
290 MeV/u carbon-ion beam (LET
60–210 KeV/micron) at the dose
rate of 0.4 +/−0.2 Gy/min; 0.5 Gy
of X-ray irradiation at 0.1 Gy/min
or 5 Gy of X-ray irradiation at
1 Gy/min.
B6C3F1 mice
Tumorigenicity was lower
for heavy ion than for 0.5
Gy and 5 Gy
X-ray irradiation
Watanabe et al.,
1998 [140]
high and low LET radiations.
1.0 Gy monoenergetic neutrons
(0.317, 0.525 and 1.026 MeV),
252Cf ﬁssion neutron (2.13 MeV)
or 137Cs γ-rays
C57BL/6N mice
Higher effectiveness of
neutrons than γ-rays to
induce oocyte and
pregranulosa cell apoptosis
correlates with the
inhibition of granulosa cell
tumor development
Nitta & Hoshi,
2003 [141]
HZE particles.
50 cGy iron ions
C57BL/6J
Induction of
ovarian tumors
Mishra et al.,
2018 [142]
Cervical
spaceﬂight
(cells were ﬂown on “Russian
MIR” space station or on the
Space Shuttle)
HeLa human cervical
cancer cells
Increased DNA damage
Ohnishi, et al.,
2002 [71]
Endometrial
Monoenergetic protons (1–10 Gy;
LET 8.35 keV/µm and 4.86 MeV)
and γ-rays (0.2–1.6 Gy)
Human endometrial
carcinoma cell lines
(HEC1B and
AN3CA cells)
Decreased cell survival
Palumbo et al.,
2001 [158]
Abbreviations: LET: linear energy transfer; HZE: high-charge and energy.
6. Current Challenges in Gynecological Cancer Risk Prediction for Spaceﬂight
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest that female astronauts have an increased
incidence of gynecological cancers. However, we should note that given the low num-
ber of female astronauts, conducting studies to determine whether spaceﬂight increases
gynecological cancer risk is difﬁcult. Another possibility could be that the current limita-
tions enforced on the time females spend in space are effective at reducing the incidence
of gynecology-speciﬁc cancers. At present, studies focusing on subjects that experience
similar occupational risk factors to astronauts is the closest form of data we can use to
address cancer risk in female astronauts. For example, there are epidemiological studies
that have found that there is an increased incidence of breast cancer in female commercial
ﬂight attendants. Since female astronauts are exposed to similar occupational risk factors
and may also have piloting experience, they may also be at an increased risk for breast
cancer [15].
6.1. Gynecologic Medical Standards for Career and Private Astronauts
The prevention of gynecologic morbidity in space begins with the selection process
and continues with personalized preventive medicine programs during the astronaut’s
Earth-based career [158]. The medical selection criteria for female astronauts with different
space agencies undertaking short- and long-term journeys in LEO are identical to those
of males except for reproductive system standards and radiation exposure limits. Until
2022, career exposure limits for women of all ages were lower than those for men [14]. The
difference in radiation exposure limits reﬂected the increased incidence of breast, thyroid,
and OC in women compared to the incidence in men and the increased risk of lung cancer

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
19 of 31
among female atomic bomb survivors. Moreover, due to reduced cardiovascular and
trauma risks, women live approximately 5–7 years longer than men, thus allowing for
more time for post ﬂight radiation-induced carcinogenesis. However, the new radiation
standard for the radiation exposure limit is now set to be less than 600 mGy and is universal
for all ages and sexes. For example, the updated value has been fully integrated into
the NASA Space Flight Human-System Standard on Crew Health that sets standards for
ﬁtness for duty, space permissible exposure limits, and permissible outcome limits, as
well as levels of medical care, medical diagnosis, intervention, treatment and care, and
countermeasures [159].
Gynecologic selection standards for astronauts have evolved and generally have
been relaxed as spaceﬂight experiences progress [158]. Current medical standards allow
for a history of endometriosis but would disqualify candidates with endometriosis that
results in severe dysmenorrhea, endometriomas, or extensive pelvic adhesive diseases.
Premenstrual syndrome must interfere with performance of duties to disqualify a female
candidate during selection. Any gynecologic malignancy is disqualifying for selection and
for ﬂight except for successfully treated cervical carcinoma in situ. As part of the ﬁnal
astronaut selection process, each female candidate ﬁnalist undergoes pelvic and abdominal
sonography, colposcopy, gynecologic examination, pap smear, and screening for high-
risk HPV. Up to the 2013 selection, no female ﬁnalists have been disqualiﬁed because of
gynecologic conditions found at the time of the selection examination. However, several
female astronaut ﬁnalists were required to undergo surgical procedures or biopsies to
rule out disqualifying pathology or neoplasia in ovarian masses, breast masses, or breast
microcalciﬁcations, or to remove large leiomyomata uteri [158].
For astronauts, the annual examination includes a physical test by a ﬂight surgeon.
Extensive blood analysis, periodic exercise capacity tests, mammography or breast MRI,
and bone density analysis (every 3 years unless postﬂight). Colposcopy is performed based
on current practice guidelines and known individual risk factors. During the examination,
careful consideration is given to effective contraception for training and ﬂight, optimizing
bone density, potential pregnancy timing, and desire for menstrual control during an
upcoming mission. For astronauts over 35 years of age and experiencing spotting or
breakthrough bleeding on cyclic or combined oral contraceptive, a saline infusion sonogram
or hysteroscopy is usually completed to rule endometrial polyps, submucous myomas, or
other abnormalities of the endometrial cavity.
Preﬂight medical evaluations are more comprehensive than annual exams and in-
clude abdominal and pelvic ultrasound studies and breast MRI. Currently, all female
astronauts receive a pre-ﬂight transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS). While TVUS is not recom-
mended for routine terrestrial OC screening, surgical management of ovarian masses can
be considered [16]. Furthermore, if an endometrial stripe abnormality is noted on TVUS,
terrestrial guidelines for endometrial hyperplasia/cancer screening can be considered,
especially in the setting of abnormal uterine bleeding [160]. In addition to the CC screening
recommended by the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology (ASCCP),
all astronauts should be encouraged to obtain the HPV vaccine series. Routine screening for
a personal and family history of precancerous lesions and cancer is recommended to trigger
consideration for preﬂight genetic screening of hereditary cancer syndromes. Lastly, when
discussing the risks and beneﬁts of hormonal modalities during spaceﬂight, counseling
regarding the known effect on breast, ovarian, and EC should be part of this counseling.
Astronauts in training that develop a disqualifying gynecologic condition are often
granted a waiver if the medical threat or risk can be eliminated or reduced to an accepted
level or the condition, so that it does not interfere with performance of duties or mission
assurance. Decisions regarding waivers for ﬂight to the ISS are made on a case-by-case
basis by NASA and the International Partners following a thorough review of the condition,
inputs from specialist consultants, successful therapeutic intervention (if needed), and
complete recovery. Final determination of medical certiﬁcation currently rests with NASA
and the Multilateral Space Medicine Board of the ISS International Partners (MSMBIP). For

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
20 of 31
the postﬂight female astronaut population, more conservative recommendations including
annual mammography with adjunctive ultrasound for dense breast tissue, or alternating
mammography with biennial breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), earlier and more
frequent colon cancer screening (starting at 40 y and every 5 y thereafter), and an annual
skin exam by dermatologist [154,158] have been recommended [161].
In the case of future female spaceﬂight participants on NASA-sponsored commercial
crew orbital ﬂights (Boeing and SpaceX), Axiom missions, and Inspiration 4 missions, they
will probably come under standards and medical selection testing that evolved from a
previously published ISS Medical Evaluation Document Volume C and Appendix F [162].
The published standard ﬁnds certain gynecologic conditions disqualifying, and individuals
outside the standards can be assessed for a waiver based on a risk assessment/mitigation
approach. Disqualifying conditions include: (1) disease, injury, or other disorders of the
gynecologic tract that could require emergency treatment or interfere with mission com-
pletion; (2) any disabling disorders of the reproductive system or associated anatomical
structures that could potentially require emergency medical care; and/or (3) history of
tumors or pathological growth will be reviewed by the MSMBIP. However, totally pri-
vate spaceﬂight participants traveling to LEO or on suborbital ﬂights will have limited
ﬂight-related responsibilities and come under the jurisdiction of the US Federal Aviation
Administration and each company’s medical policy. Proposed gynecology guidance for
private spaceﬂight participants includes assessing the history of surgery, medication use,
current pregnancy, recent postpartum state, or recent pregnancy loss status [158].
6.2. Countermeasures
There are numerous protective measures speciﬁc to ionizing space radiation expo-
sure that could be considered, particularly for exploration-class missions. As discussed,
space radiation remains one of the primary factors limiting human tolerance to long-term
spaceﬂight. At present, one of the principal countermeasures to protect astronauts from the
biological effects of space radiation is limiting the time spent in space. However, this is not
feasible for long-term interplanetary space travel, so other remaining measures will have to
be implemented.
Preventing space radiation exposure through shielding remains a major challenge
for space travel. Reasons for this include restrictions on cost, spacecraft mass, and the
nature of ionizing particles, which can penetrate spacecraft hulls and result in secondary
intra-vehicular radiation [19]. Spacecraft shielding can be divided into two main categories:
passive shielding, constructed of speciﬁc materials and always present on spacecraft, and
active shielding, which utilizes magnetic or electrostatic ﬁelds. In 2019, Barthel and Sarigul-
Klijn reviewed shielding optimization methods for space travel beyond the inﬂuence of the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁelds [163].
Regarding passive shielding, optimization of shielding placement could help overcome
the mass limitations of spacecraft. Furthermore, due to the interactions between the
spacecraft and ionizing particles, materials with lighter nuclei atoms are ideal as high mass
nuclei in shielding materials would increase the number of neutrons inside the spacecraft;
an electron plasma would be most effective followed by liquid hydrogen. Special space
suits with built-in shielding have also been proposed to eradicate the cost of shielding an
entire spacecraft but to still provide reasonable protection to astronauts. Active shielding
could provide protection, potentially without compromising the mass of spacecraft to the
same degree. Electrostatic shielding would work by placing several charged spheres in
speciﬁc orientations around the spacecraft. This would create a “safe zone” in a particular
location on the spacecraft. Magnetic shielding would be created by using a superconducting
solenoid around the spacecraft, generating a high magnetic ﬁeld that would deﬂect particles
below a certain energy threshold. The shielding technology described still has a long way
to go in its development but holds the potential to provide effective protection to astronauts
on exploration class missions.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
21 of 31
Biological countermeasures could also be utilized to protect against the ill-effects
of ISR-induced oxidative stress. In 2021, Montesinos et al. discussed the role of these
countermeasures, which will also be summarized here [164]. Several studies have found
that dietary measure and supplementation is likely to have a protective effect in astronauts.
It has long been known that a varied diet full of plant foods provides us with the nutrition
needed for optimum health. The limitations of storage space and mass on spacecraft
restricts the access of crew to a wide variety of foods that would provide them with an
abundance of phytochemicals, antioxidants, and other compounds known to interfere with
oxidative stress pathways.
N-Acetyl-L-Cysteine (NAC) contains an acetyl group that enhances its lipophilicity
and allows for the molecule to cross the cell lipid bilayer. This contributes to replenishment
of glutathione and thus may reduce both cellular ROS and mitochondrial damage. Because
NAC tends to be more stable, it can be stored and administered in the form of a supplement
to enhance cellular antioxidant capacity to combat the adverse effects of space environment
exposure during space travels. DNA protection was observed in mice who received oral
NAC treatment followed by a whole-body irradiation of 1000 mGy gamma radiation at a
dose rate of 5000 mGy/min [165]. Treatment with NAC increased the overall health and
quality of post ovulatory oocytes in vitro. Reduced spindle defects, decreased abnormal
mitochondrial distribution, reduced reactive oxygen species, increased levels of intracellular
ATP, and decreased abnormal cortical granules distribution were observed in oocytes
treated with NAC [166]. However, more studies are needed to try to closely replicate space
radiation to more accurately determine the effects of such radiation or the protective effects
of countermeasures such as this.
Selenium is amongst the group of micronutrients that is found to be depleted during
long-duration spaceﬂight. This compound is needed for the normal function of oxidative
stress protection molecules like glutathione peroxidase, thioredoxin reductase, and the
selenoprotein family [167]. Selenium deﬁciency is also associated with dysfunction of
the immune system [168]. Furthermore, taurine is a sulfur-containing amino acid also
involved in mitochondrial health. Previous studies suggested that taurine conjugates with
tRNALeu (UUR) or tRNALys (UUU) of mitochondria, which is important for proper codon-
anticodon matching, thus increasing the accuracy and quality of mitochondrial proteins
produced [169]. Supplementation of selenium, taurine, and other compounds that protect
against oxidative stress might be important in lessening the ionizing effects of long-term
radiation exposure on interplanetary space travel. However, many antioxidant compounds
are typically needed in large doses in order to achieve the desired clinical effect as single
agents. Unfortunately, the doses needed to achieve this exceed tolerability and/or safe
levels. The use of a single agent may also downregulate other natural antioxidant pathways,
given the complexity of these mechanisms in the human body [170]. Due to the limitations
on the dietary intake of astronauts, the development of a single supplementation method
that combines safe levels of the most effective chemopreventive compounds would be most
desirable for long-term spaceﬂight missions. Better yet, developing a way for astronauts to
grow their own fresh produce in space from which they can source their antioxidants and
nutrients would be another desirable way of providing astronauts with compounds that
are protective against oxidative stress and cancer development. Other studies have looked
into several interesting biological methods like injecting tardigrade DNA [171] or neulasta,
which is a bone marrow stimulant, into human tissue [172]. When injected in mini pigs,
these were found to have a modest effect on the body’s response to irradiation.
With respect to women astronauts, hormonal contraception is already standard prac-
tice, which may have countermeasure impacts. There are also non-contraceptive health
beneﬁts of using hormonal contraceptives. Many considerations related to cancer risk
have been examined on Earth. There are extensive data demonstrating combined oral
contraceptive use protects against the development of colon, endometrial, and OC, with
increasing protective effects with longer duration use [173]. Similarly, the levonorgestrel
intrauterine device is associated with a reduced risk of EC and OC [173]. However, CC risk

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
22 of 31
has been found to increase with increasing duration of oral contraceptive use and newer
combined hormonal contraceptive options of the vaginal ring and transdermal patch have
a similar increased risk of CC [174,175]. Progestin-only contraceptive users do not have an
increased relative risk of developing CC [175]. Furthermore, in HPV-positive women, it
has been suggested that the estrogens and progestogens in hormonal contraception could
enhance expression of HPV genes through hormone response elements on the viral genome,
consequently increasing the risk of CC [176].
Current combined oral contraceptive use is associated with a slightly higher risk of
breast cancer (7%); however, this appears to be more associated with triphasic oral contra-
ceptive pills and decreases after discontinuation of oral contraceptives [177,178]. Current
evidence also suggests that levonorgestrel intrauterine device users also have an increased
risk of developing breast cancer, and this risk is increased with increasing age [178,179].
Overall, the beneﬁts of hormonal contraceptive use outweigh the slight increased risks of
cancer development. This information is reassuring, however, as mentioned before, there
is a lack of knowledge on hormonal contraception use for long-term spaceﬂight missions,
and contraception use is still an important factor to account for in the overall reproductive
health of female astronauts. The risk of breast cancer in female astronauts also merits
further study, especially with relation to the exposure to space radiation.
Additionally, proposed pharmacological measures include, but are not limited to,
pharmaceutical radioprotectors and immunomodulation. Pharmaceutical radioprotectors
are administered before exposure to a radiation environment. Radiation mitigators are
administered after exposure but before the signs and symptoms of radiation exposure
occur [180]. To date, the use of these agents thus far in controlled clinical scenarios, where
radiation exposure can be controlled and quantitated, does not reﬂect the unpredictable
radiation environment in space. Timing the administration of these agents would therefore
be much harder in astronauts [164]. Immunomodulation-based agents include prospective
DNA- and RNA-based anti-radiation vaccines in addition to anti-radiation antidotes.
These would work via a group of antibodies and natural inhibitory proteins that prevent
inﬂammation, pathological apoptosis, and necrosis of radiation-exposed tissues [164].
As discussed before, radiation has been shown to have molecular effects. These
include genetic and epigenetic changes that alter molecular functioning and can lead to
carcinogenesis [181]. Genetic counseling and screening guidelines are available through
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), National Society of Genetic Counselors (NSGC),
and the Society of Gynecologic Oncology (SGO), and it is reasonable to consider screening
astronauts preﬂight for genetic risk factors for certain cancers. Consideration may need
to given for genetic screening, especially of female astronauts for certain mutations such
as BRCA1/BRCA2 and others associated with breast cancer. If a carrier condition has
been identiﬁed, screening and risk-reduction protocols can be discussed depending on
the type of mutation. Terrestrially, risk-reduction surgeries depending on the mutation
recommended at various ages. Salpingo-oophorectomy is recommended at age 35–40 years
for BRCA1 carriers and at age 40–45 years for BRCA2 carriers. For BRIP1, RAD51C, and
RAD51D carriers, it is recommended at age 45–50 years [182].
While work is ongoing in categorizing the radiosensitive/radioresistant genes, we
should note that this may be an interesting application of gene/epigenetic modiﬁcation
technologies as radiation countermeasures. Recent advances in these methods have shown
improved overall outcomes, where approaches altering the epigenome are readily re-
versible [183,184]. Successful identiﬁcation and modulation of these genes could allow for a
signiﬁcant reduction in negative outcomes experienced by future generations of astronauts.
7. Future Perspectives
Omics approaches are likely to help in understanding the human health risks due
to spaceﬂight missions. Since its inception in 2014, the NASA GeneLab data repository
currently boasts over 271 omics data collected from spaceﬂight and ground simulation

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
23 of 31
experiments, but it contains no data on female human gynecological cancers [185]. Inter-
estingly, there exists only one dataset relevant to females, and the study only investigated
the mammary gland of mice [186]. Therefore, there is a signiﬁcant need for studies that
investigate female physiology in space.
There are a number of research opportunities that remain for considering the risks
and management of breast and gynecologic cancers pre- and postﬂight. These include the
following: histological differences of any tumors that have occurred in astronauts, char-
acterizing molecular pathways involved in carcinogenesis in analog mammalian models,
exploratory omics endpoints, the possibility HPV reactivation, the role of radiation coun-
termeasures in prevention, optimizing in-ﬂight or postﬂight screening protocols, changes
in the microbiota of the reproductive tract during spaceﬂight and their relation to gyneco-
logical cancers, and evaluating the role that artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning will
play in cancer detection and prevention. Further study on gynecological cancers, including
the incidence of the rare types, in space will build a knowledge base that will help to ensure
the safety and health of female astronauts by giving them access to prevention, diagnosis,
and countermeasures during their space missions.
It would be extremely beneﬁcial to the community to come with a roadmap of stud-
ies that needs to be conducted so gynecological risks associated with exploration class
missions to the Moon and Mars are minimized. Further, as commercial and private astro-
nauts become more common, obtaining gynecologic and reproductive endpoints following
spaceﬂight will be critical for the creation of preﬂight, in-ﬂight, and postﬂight proto-
cols for the screening, diagnosis, and management of gynecologic morbidity and overall
astronaut safety.
8. Conclusions
The current data reveal a scarcity of knowledge about the impact of space radiation
and microgravity on gynecologic cancer, as there have been insufﬁcient numbers of female
astronauts exposed to long-duration, low-dose rate, and proton and heavy ion radiation
to reliably determine the impact on the female reproductive system. With the upcoming
Artemis missions set to place the ﬁrst females on the Moon, there will be longer duration of
exposures to both microgravity and space radiation; hence, the inﬂuence of ﬂight length
on risks related to gynecological cancers will demand a larger focus in ensuring astronaut
safety during ﬂight and postﬂight. Indeed, among all body tissues, the male and female
gonads are among the most sensitive to radiation. Therefore, these tissues may be one of
the best to study to determine space radiation related exposures.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.D.-F., R.D.F., A.B. and J.C.-A.; writing—original draft
preparation, R.D.-F., R.D.F., F.K., Y.S., S.D., B.A.M., J.G.S., A.B. and J.C.-A.; writing—review and
editing, R.D.-F., R.D.F., F.K., Y.S., S.D., B.A.M., S.A., A.P.G.-C., A.S., A.S.G., W.K., J.B., S.S., D.M.P.,
A.C., L.K.C., A.E.R., J.G.S., A.B. and J.C.-A.; funding acquisition, J.C.-A. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This paper is based upon work from COST Action CA18117—European network for
Gynecological Rare Cancer research: From Concept to Cure (GYNOCARE), supported by COST
(European Cooperation in Science and Technology). COST (European Cooperation in Science and
Technology) is a funding agency for research and innovation networks. COST Actions help connect
research initiatives across Europe and beyond to enable scientists to grow their ideas by sharing
them with their peers. This boosts their research, career, and innovation (www.cost.eu, accessed
date 31 March 2022). R.D.-F., R.D.F., Y.S., S.S., S.D., B.A.M., A.B. and J.C.-A. are Action management
committee members and/or form part of Working Groups 1–4, and J.C.-A. is the chairperson of
this Action.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable, as no new data on human or animal studies
were collected.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable, as no new data on human or animal studies were collected.
Data Availability Statement: This review paper does not report any new data.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
24 of 31
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
ACMG
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
ACOG
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
ASCCP
American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology
CC
cervical cancer
CSA
Canadian Space Agency
3D-C
3D-clinostat
EC
endometrial cancer
ESA
European Space Agency
GCR
galactic cosmic radiation
HFB
hydrofocusing bioreactor
HPV
human papillomavirus
HZE
high Z and energy
ISS
International Space Station
JAXA
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
LEO
low Earth orbit
LET
Linear Energy Transfer
MSMBIP
Multilateral Space Medicine Board of the ISS International Partners
NAC
N-Acetyl-L-Cysteine
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NSGC
National Society of Genetic Counselors
OC
ovarian cancer
RBE
relative biological effectiveness
RCCS
rotary cell culture system
RER
radiation effects ratio
RWV
rotating-wall vessel
SGO
Society of Gynecologic Oncology
SPE
solar particle events
References
1.
Steller, J.G.; Alberts, J.R.; Ronca, A.E. Oxidative Stress as Cause, Consequence, or Biomarker of Altered Female Reproduction and
Development in the Space Environment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 3729. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Cortés-Sánchez, J.L.; Callant, J.; Krüger, M.; Sahana, J.; Kraus, A.; Baselet, B.; Infanger, M.; Baatout, S.; Grimm, D. Cancer Studies
under Space Conditions: Finding Answers Abroad. Biomedicines 2021, 10, 25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Afshinnekoo, E.; Scott, R.T.; MacKay, M.J.; Pariset, E.; Cekanaviciute, E.; Barker, R.; Gilroy, S.; Hassane, D.; Smith, S.M.;
Zwart, S.R.; et al. Fundamental Biological Features of Spaceﬂight: Advancing the Field to Enable Deep-Space Exploration. Cell
2020, 183, 1162–1184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Axpe, E.; Chan, D.; Abegaz, M.F.; Schreurs, A.S.; Alwood, J.S.; Globus, R.K.; Appel, E.A. A human mission to Mars: Predicting
the bone mineral density loss of astronauts. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0226434. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Patel, Z.S.; Brunstetter, T.J.; Tarver, W.J.; Whitmire, A.M.; Zwart, S.R.; Smith, S.M.; Huff, J.L. Red risks for a journey to the red
planet: The highest priority human health risks for a mission to Mars. NPJ Microgravity 2020, 6, 33. [CrossRef]
6.
Crucian, B.; Simpson, R.J.; Mehta, S.; Stowe, R.; Chouker, A.; Hwang, S.A.; Actor, J.K.; Salam, A.P.; Pierson, D.; Sams, C. Terrestrial
stress analogs for spaceﬂight associated immune system dysregulation. Brain Behav. Immun. 2014, 39, 23–32. [CrossRef]
7.
Leser, N.; Wagner, S. The effects of acute social isolation on long-term social recognition memory. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 2015,
124, 97–103. [CrossRef]
8.
Reschke, M.F.; Cohen, H.S.; Cerisano, J.M.; Clayton, J.A.; Cromwell, R.; Danielson, R.W.; Hwang, E.Y.; Tingen, C.; Allen, J.R.;
Tomko, D.L. Effects of sex and gender on adaptation to space: Neurosensory systems. J. Women’s Health 2014, 23, 959–962.
[CrossRef]
9.
Clark, B.C.; Fernhall, B.; Ploutz-Snyder, L.L. Adaptations in human neuromuscular function following prolonged unweighting: I.
Skeletal muscle contractile properties and applied ischemia efﬁcacy. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006, 101, 256–263. [CrossRef]
10.
Ronca, A.E.; Baker, E.S.; Bavendam, T.G.; Beck, K.D.; Miller, V.M.; Tash, J.S.; Jenkins, M. Effects of sex and gender on adaptations
to space: Reproductive health. J. Women’s Health 2014, 23, 967–974. [CrossRef]
11.
Newhauser, W.D.; Zhang, R. The physics of proton therapy. Phys. Med. Biol. 2015, 60, R155–R209. [CrossRef]
12.
RCR—Royal College of Radiologists. Radiotherapy Dose Fractionation Third Edition. 2019. Available online: https://www.rcr.ac.
uk/publication/radiotherapy-dose-fractionation-third-edition (accessed on 3 March 2022).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
25 of 31
13.
Freese, S.; Reddy, A.P.; Lehnhardt, K. Radiation impacts on human health during spaceﬂight beyond Low Earth Orbit. REACH
2016, 2–4, 1–7. [CrossRef]
14.
Jones, C.B.; Mange, A.; Granata, L.; Johnson, B.; Hienz, R.D.; Davis, C.M. Short and Long-Term Changes in Social Odor
Recognition and Plasma Cytokine Levels Following Oxygen (16O) Ion Radiation Exposure. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 339.
[CrossRef]
15.
Barr, Y.R.; Bacal, K.; Jones, J.A.; Hamilton, D.R. Breast cancer and spaceﬂight: Risk and management. Aviat. Space Environ. Med.
2007, 78, A26–A37.
16.
Steller, J.G.; Blue, R.S.; Burns, R.; Bayuse, T.; Antonsen, E.L.; Jain, V.; Blackwell, M.M.; Jennings, R.T. Gynecologic Risk Mitigation
Considerations for Long-Duration Spaceﬂight. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 2020, 91, 543–564. [CrossRef]
17.
Zeitlin, C.; Hassler, D.M.; Cucinotta, F.A.; Ehresmann, B.; Wimmer-Schweingruber, R.F.; Brinza, D.E.; Kang, S.; Weigle, G.;
Böttcher, S.; Böhm, E.; et al. Measurements of energetic particle radiation in transit to Mars on the Mars Science Laboratory.
Science 2013, 340, 1080–1084. [CrossRef]
18.
Wilson, J.W. Environmental geophysics and SPS shielding. In Proceedings of the Workshop on the Radiation Environment of the
Satellite Power System, Berkeley, CA, USA, 15 September 1978.
19.
Chancellor, J.C.; Scott, G.B.; Sutton, J.P. Space Radiation: The Number One Risk to Astronaut Health beyond Low Earth Orbit. Life
2014, 4, 491–510. [CrossRef]
20.
Simpson, J.A. Elemental and isotopic composition of the galactic cosmic rays. Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 1983, 33, 323–381.
[CrossRef]
21.
Ackermann, M.; Ajello, M.; Allafort, A.; Baldini, L.; Ballet, J.; Barbiellini, G.; Baring, M.G.; Bastieri, D.; Bechtol, K.;
Bellazzini, R.; et al. Detection of the characteristic pion-decay signature in supernova remnants. Science 2013, 339, 807–811.
[CrossRef]
22.
Cucinotta, F.A.; Durante, M. Cancer risk from exposure to galactic cosmic rays: Implications for space exploration by human
beings. Lancet Oncol. 2006, 7, 431–435. [CrossRef]
23.
Onorato, G.; Di Schiavi, E.; Di Cunto, F. Understanding the Effects of Deep Space Radiation on Nervous System: The Role of
Genetically Tractable Experimental Models. Front. Phys. 2020, 8, 362. [CrossRef]
24.
Dymova, M.; Dmitrieva, M.; Kuligina, E.; Richter, V.; Savinov, S.; Shchudlo, I.; Sycheva, T.; Taskaeva, I.; Taskaev, S. Method of
Measuring High-LET Particles Dose. Radiat. Res. 2021, 196, 192–196. [CrossRef]
25.
Cortese, F.; Klokov, D.; Osipov, A.; Stefaniak, J.; Moskalev, A.; Schastnaya, J.; Cantor, C.; Aliper, A.; Mamoshina, P.;
Ushakov, I.; et al.
Vive la radiorésistance!: Converging research in radiobiology and biogerontology to enhance human
radioresistance for deep space exploration and colonization. Oncotarget 2018, 9, 14692–14722. [CrossRef]
26.
Tommasino, F.; Durante, M. Proton radiobiology. Cancers 2015, 7, 353–381. [CrossRef]
27.
Saha, J.; Wilson, P.; Thieberger, P.; Lowenstein, D.; Wang, M.; Cucinotta, F.A. Biological characterization of low-energy ions with
high-energy deposition on human cells. Radiat. Res. 2014, 182, 282–291. [CrossRef]
28.
Benton, E.R.; Benton, E.V. Space radiation dosimetry in low-Earth orbit and beyond. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B. 2001,
184, 255–294. [CrossRef]
29.
International Commission on Radiological Protection. 1990 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological
Protection. In Annals of the ICRP; Pergamon Press: Oxford, UK, 1991; Volume 21, pp. 1–201.
30.
Chancellor, J.C.; Blue, R.S.; Cengel, K.A.; Auñón-Chancellor, S.M.; Rubins, K.H.; Katzgraber, H.G.; Kennedy, A.R. Limitations in
predicting the space radiation health risk for exploration astronauts. NPJ Microgravity 2018, 4, 8. [CrossRef]
31.
Schwadron, N.A.; Blake, J.B.; Case, A.W.; Joyce, C.J.; Kasper, J.; Mazur, J.; Petro, N.; Quinn, M.; Porter, J.A.; Smith, C.W.; et al. Does
the worsening galactic cosmic radiation environment observed by CRaTER preclude future manned deep space exploration?
Space Weather 2014, 12, 622–632. [CrossRef]
32.
Papaioannou, A.; Anastasiadis, A.; Sandberg, I.; Jiggens, P. Nowcasting of Solar Energetic Particle Events using near real-time
Coronal Mass Ejection characteristics in the framework of the FORSPEF tool. J. Space Weather Space Clim. 2018, 8, A37. [CrossRef]
33.
Restier-Verlet, J.; El-Nachef, L.; Ferlazzo, M.L.; Al-Choboq, J.; Granzotto, A.; Bouchet, A.; Foray, N. Radiation on Earth or in Space:
What Does It Change? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 3739. [CrossRef]
34.
Zeitlin, C.; Hassler, D.M.; Ehresmann, B.; Rafkin, S.C.R.; Guo, J.; Wimmer-Schweingruber, R.F.; Berger, T.; Matthiä, D. Measure-
ments of radiation quality factor on Mars with the Mars Science Laboratory Radiation Assessment Detector. Life Sci. Space Res.
2019, 22, 89–97. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Mishra, B.; Luderer, U. Reproductive hazards of space travel in women and men. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 2019, 15, 713–730.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Serova, L.V.; Denisova, L.A. The effect of weightlessness on the reproductive function of mammals. Physiologist 1982, 25, S9–S12.
[PubMed]
37.
Hong, X.; Ratri, A.; Choi, S.Y.; Tash, J.S.; Ronca, A.E.; Alwood, J.S.; Christenson, L.K. Effects of spaceﬂight aboard the International
Space Station on mouse estrous cycle and ovarian gene expression. NPJ Microgravity 2021, 7, 11. [CrossRef]
38.
Lei, X.; Cao, Y.; Ma, B.; Zhang, Y.; Ning, L.; Qian, J.; Zhang, L.; Qu, Y.; Zhang, T.; Li, D.; et al. Development of mouse
preimplantation embryos in space. Natl. Sci. Rev. 2020, 7, 1437–1446. [CrossRef]
39.
Alberts, J.R.; Ronca, A.E. Development as adaptation: A paradigm for gravitational and space biology. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 2005,
10, 175–207.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
26 of 31
40.
Ronca, A.E.; Alberts, J.R. Physiology of a microgravity environment selected contribution: Effects of spaceﬂight during pregnancy
on labor and birth at 1 G. J. Appl. Physiol. 2000, 89, 849–854. [CrossRef]
41.
Burden, H.W.; Zary, J.; Alberts, J.R. Effects of space ﬂight on the immunohistochemical demonstration of connexin 26 and
connexin 43 in the postpartum uterus of rats. J. Reprod. Fertil. 1999, 116, 229–234. [CrossRef]
42.
Oyama, J.; Platt, W.T. Reproduction and Growth of Mice and Rats under Conditions of Simulated Increased Gravity. Am. J.
Physiol. 1967, 212, 164–166. [CrossRef]
43.
Plaut, K.; Maple, R.L.; Wade, C.E.; Baer, L.A.; Ronca, A.E. Effects of hypergravity on mammary metabolic function: Gravity acts
as a continuum. J. Appl. Physiol. 2003, 95, 2350–2354. [CrossRef]
44.
Ronca, A.E.; Baer, L.A.; Daunton, N.G.; Wade, C.E. Maternal reproductive experience enhances early postnatal outcome following
gestation and birth of rats in hypergravity. Biol. Reprod. 2001, 65, 805–813. [CrossRef]
45.
Wu, Q.J.; Li, Y.Y.; Tu, C.; Zhu, J.; Qian, K.Q.; Feng, T.B.; Li, C.; Wu, L.; Ma, X.X. Parity and endometrial cancer risk: A meta-analysis
of epidemiological studies. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 14243. [CrossRef]
46.
Lambe, M.; Hsieh, C.C.; Chan, H.W.; Ekbom, A.; Trichopoulos, D.; Adami, H.O. Parity, age at ﬁrst and last birth, and risk of breast
cancer: A population-based study in Sweden. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 1996, 38, 305–311. [CrossRef]
47.
Sung, H.K.; Ma, S.H.; Choi, J.Y.; Hwang, Y.; Ahn, C.; Kim, B.G.; Kim, Y.M.; Kim, J.W.; Kang, S.; Kim, J.; et al. The Effect of
Breastfeeding Duration and Parity on the Risk of Epithelial Ovarian Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. J. Prev.
Med. Public Health 2016, 49, 349–366. [CrossRef]
48.
Jain, V.; Wotring, V.E. Medically induced amenorrhea in female astronauts. NPJ Microgravity 2016, 2, 16008. [CrossRef]
49.
Prasad, K.N. (Ed.) Handbook of Radiobiology; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1995.
50.
Ogilvy-Stuart, A.L.; Shalet, S.M. Effect of radiation on the human reproductive system. Environ. Health Perspect. 1993, 101,
109–116.
51.
Marci, R.; Mallozzi, M.; Di Benedetto, L.; Schimberni, M.; Mossa, S.; Soave, I.; Palomba, S.; Caserta, D. Radiations and female
fertility. Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol. 2018, 16, 112. [CrossRef]
52.
Hanahan, D.; Weinberg, R.A. Hallmarks of cancer: The next generation. Cell 2011, 144, 646–674. [CrossRef]
53.
Grimm, D.; Bauer, J.; Wise, P.; Krüger, M.; Simonsen, U.; Wehland, M.; Infanger, M.; Corydon, T.J. The role of SOX family members
in solid tumours and metastasis. Semin. Cancer Biol. 2020, 67, 122–153. [CrossRef]
54.
Fouad, Y.A.; Aanei, C. Revisiting the hallmarks of cancer. Am. J. Cancer Res. 2017, 7, 1016–1036.
55.
Moreno-Villanueva, M.; Wu, H. Radiation and microgravity—Associated stress factors and carcinogensis. REACH 2019, 13,
100027. [CrossRef]
56.
Nassef, M.Z.; Kopp, S.; Wehland, M.; Melnik, D.; Sahana, J.; Krüger, M.; Corydon, T.J.; Oltmann, H.; Schmitz, B.; Schütte, A.; et al.
Real Microgravity Inﬂuences the Cytoskeleton and Focal Adhesions in Human Breast Cancer Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3156.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Kopp, S.; Slumstrup, L.; Corydon, T.J.; Sahana, J.; Aleshcheva, G.; Islam, T.; Magnusson, N.E.; Wehland, M.; Bauer, J.;
Infanger, M.; et al. Identiﬁcations of novel mechanisms in breast cancer cells involving duct-like multicellular spheroid for-
mation after exposure to the Random Positioning Machine. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26887. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Nassef, M.Z.; Kopp, S.; Melnik, D.; Corydon, T.J.; Sahana, J.; Krüger, M.; Wehland, M.; Bauer, T.J.; Liemersdorf, C.;
Hemmersbach, R.; et al. Short-Term Microgravity Inﬂuences Cell Adhesion in Human Breast Cancer Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019,
20, 5730. [CrossRef]
59.
Deng, B.; Liu, R.; Tian, X.; Han, Z.; Chen, J. Simulated microgravity inhibits the viability and migration of glioma via
FAK/RhoA/Rock and FAK/Nek2 signaling. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 2019, 55, 260–271. [CrossRef]
60.
Dietz, C.; Infanger, M.; Romswinkel, A.; Strube, F.; Kraus, A. Apoptosis Induction and Alteration of Cell Adherence in Human
Lung Cancer Cells under Simulated Microgravity. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3601. [CrossRef]
61.
Przystupski, D.; Górska, A.; Michel, O.; Podwin, A.; ´Sniadek, P.; Łapczy´nski, R.; Saczko, J.; Kulbacka, J. Testing Lab-on-a-Chip
Technology for Culturing Human Melanoma Cells under Simulated Microgravity. Cancers 2021, 13, 402. [CrossRef]
62.
Warnke, E.; Pietsch, J.; Wehland, M.; Bauer, J.; Infanger, M.; Görög, M.; Hemmersbach, R.; Braun, M.; Ma, X.; Sahana, J.; et al.
Spheroid formation of human thyroid cancer cells under simulated microgravity: A possible role of CTGF and CAV1. Cell
Commun. Signal. 2014, 12, 32. [CrossRef]
63.
Riwaldt, S.; Bauer, J.; Pietsch, J.; Braun, M.; Segerer, J.; Schwarzwälder, A.; Corydon, T.J.; Infanger, M.; Grimm, D. The Importance
of Caveolin-1 as Key-Regulator of Three-Dimensional Growth in Thyroid Cancer Cells Cultured under Real and Simulated
Microgravity Conditions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 16, 28296–28310. [CrossRef]
64.
Cao, Q.; Liu, W.; Wang, J.; Cao, J.; Yang, H. A single low dose of Fe ions can cause long-term biological responses in NL20 human
bronchial epithelial cells. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 2018, 57, 31–40. [CrossRef]
65.
Kennedy, E.M.; Powell, D.R.; Li, Z.; Bell, J.S.K.; Barwick, B.G.; Feng, H.; McCrary, M.R.; Dwivedi, B.; Kowalski, J.;
Dynan, W.S.; et al. Galactic Cosmic Radiation Induces Persistent Epigenome Alterations Relevant to Human Lung Cancer. Sci.
Rep. 2018, 8, 6709. [CrossRef]
66.
Patel, R.; Zhang, L.; Desai, A.; Hoenerhoff, M.J.; Kennedy, L.H.; Radivoyevitch, T.; La Tessa, C.; Gerson, S.L.; Welford, S.M.
Protons and High-Linear Energy Transfer Radiation Induce Genetically Similar Lymphomas with High Penetrance in a Mouse
Model of the Aging Human Hematopoietic System. Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 2020, 108, 1091–1102. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
27 of 31
67.
Wage, J.; Ma, L.; Peluso, M.; Lamont, C.; Evens, A.M.; Hahnfeldt, P.; Hlatky, L.; Beheshti, A. Proton irradiation impacts age-driven
modulations of cancer progression inﬂuenced by immune system transcriptome modiﬁcations from splenic tissue. J. Radiat. Res.
2015, 56, 792–803. [CrossRef]
68.
Cheema, A.K.; Suman, S.; Kaur, P.; Singh, R.; Fornace, A.J., Jr.; Datta, K. Long-term differential changes in mouse intestinal
metabolomics after γ and heavy ion radiation exposure. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e87079. [CrossRef]
69.
Weil, M.M.; Bedford, J.S.; Bielefeldt-Ohmann, H.; Ray, F.A.; Genik, P.C.; Ehrhart, E.J.; Fallgren, C.M.; Hailu, F.; Battaglia, C.L.;
Charles, B.; et al. Incidence of acute myeloid leukemia and hepatocellular carcinoma in mice irradiated with 1 GeV/nucleon
(56)Fe ions. Radiat. Res. 2009, 172, 213–219. [CrossRef]
70.
Turker, M.S.; Grygoryev, D.; Lasarev, M.; Ohlrich, A.; Rwatambuga, F.A.; Johnson, S.; Dan, C.; Eckelmann, B.; Hryciw, G.;
Mao, J.H.; et al. Simulated space radiation-induced mutants in the mouse kidney display widespread genomic change. PLoS
ONE 2017, 12, e0180412. [CrossRef]
71.
Ohnishi, T.; Ohnishi, K.; Takahashi, A.; Taniguchi, Y.; Sato, M.; Nakano, T.; Nagaoka, S. Detection of DNA damage induced by
space radiation in Mir and space shuttle. J. Radiat. Res. 2002, 43, S133–S136. [CrossRef]
72.
Lu, T.; Zhang, Y.; Wong, M.; Feiveson, A.; Gaza, R.; Stofﬂe, N.; Wang, H.; Wilson, B.; Rohde, L.; Stodieck, L.; et al. Detection of
DNA damage by space radiation in human ﬁbroblasts ﬂown on the International Space Station. Life Sci. Space Res. 2017, 12, 24–31.
[CrossRef]
73.
Zhang, Y.; Lu, T.; Wong, M.; Wang, X.; Stodieck, L.; Karouia, F.; Story, M.; Wu, H. Transient gene and microRNA expression proﬁle
changes of conﬂuent human ﬁbroblast cells in spaceﬂight. FASEB J. 2016, 30, 2211–2224. [CrossRef]
74.
Blakely, E.A.; Kronenberg, A. Heavy-ion radiobiology: New approaches to delineate mechanisms underlying enhanced biological
effectiveness. Radiat. Res. 1998, 150, S126–S145. [CrossRef]
75.
Koontz, B.F.; Verhaegen, F.; De Ruysscher, D. Tumour and normal tissue radiobiology in mouse models: How close are mice to
mini-humans? Br. J. Radiol. 2017, 90, 20160441. [CrossRef]
76.
Barcellos-Hoff, M.H.; Blakely, E.A.; Burma, S.; Fornace, A.J., Jr.; Gerson, S.; Hlatky, L.; Kirsch, D.G.; Luderer, U.; Shay, J.; Wang, Y.;
et al. Concepts and challenges in cancer risk prediction for the space radiation environment. Life Sci. Space Res. 2015, 6, 92–103.
[CrossRef]
77.
Cucinotta, F.A.; To, K.; Cacao, E. Predictions of space radiation fatality risk for exploration missions. Life Sci. Space Res.
2017, 13, 1–11. [CrossRef]
78.
Shuryak, I.; Fornace, A.J., Jr.; Datta, K.; Suman, S.; Kumar, S.; Sachs, R.K.; Brenner, D.J. Scaling Human Cancer Risks from Low
LET to High LET when Dose-Effect Relationships are Complex. Radiat. Res. 2017, 187, 476–482. [CrossRef]
79.
Mishra, K.P. Carcinogenic risk from low-dose radiation exposure is overestimated. J. Radiat. Cancer Res. 2017, 8, 1–3. [CrossRef]
80.
Prasad, N.R. Radiation carcinogenesis: Mechanisms and experimental models—A meeting report. J. Radiat. Cancer Res. 2017, 8,
114–117. [CrossRef]
81.
Moreno-Villanueva, M.; Wong, M.; Lu, T.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, H. Interplay of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage and
DNA damage response. NPJ Microgravity 2017, 3, 14. [CrossRef]
82.
Shi, F.; Wang, Y.C.; Zhao, T.Z.; Zhang, S.; Du, T.Y.; Yang, C.B.; Li, Y.H.; Sun, X.Q. Effects of simulated microgravity on human
umbilical vein endothelial cell angiogenesis and role of the PI3K-Akt-eNOS signal pathway. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e40365. [CrossRef]
83.
Dai, Z.; Guo, F.; Wu, F.; Xu, H.; Yang, C.; Li, J.; Liang, P.; Zhang, H.; Qu, L.; Tan, Y.; et al. Integrin αvβ3 mediates the synergetic
regulation of core-binding factor α1 transcriptional activity by gravity and insulin-like growth factor-1 through phosphoinositide
3-kinase signaling. Bone 2014, 69, 126–132. [CrossRef]
84.
Najrana, T.; Sanchez-Esteban, J. Mechanotransduction as an Adaptation to Gravity. Front. Pediatr. 2016, 4, 140. [CrossRef]
85.
Engelman, J.A.; Luo, J.; Cantley, L.C. The evolution of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases as regulators of growth and metabolism.
Nat. Rev. Genet. 2006, 7, 606–619. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Arun, R.P.; Sivanesan, D.; Vidyasekar, P.; Verma, R.S. PTEN/FOXO3/AKT pathway regulates cell death and mediates morpho-
genetic differentiation of Colorectal Cancer Cells under Simulated Microgravity. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 5952. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Monti, N.; Masiello, M.G.; Proietti, S.; Catizone, A.; Ricci, G.; Harrath, A.H.; Alwasel, S.H.; Cucina, A.; Bizzarri, M. Survival
Pathways Are Differently Affected by Microgravity in Normal and Cancerous Breast Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 862.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Hybel, T.E.; Dietrichs, D.; Sahana, J.; Corydon, T.J.; Nassef, M.Z.; Wehland, M.; Krüger, M.; Magnusson, N.E.; Bauer, J.;
Utpatel, K.; et al. Simulated Microgravity Inﬂuences VEGF, MAPK, and PAM Signaling in Prostate Cancer Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2020, 21, 1263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Sarkar, R.; Pampaloni, F. In Vitro Models of Bone Marrow Remodelling and Immune Dysfunction in Space: Present State and
Future Directions. Biomedicines 2022, 10, 766. [CrossRef]
90.
Elgart, S.R.; Little, M.P.; Chappell, L.J.; Milder, C.M.; Shavers, M.R.; Huff, J.L.; Patel, Z.S. Radiation Exposure and Mortality from
Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer in Early NASA Astronauts. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 8480. [CrossRef]
91.
Di Trolio, R.; Di Lorenzo, G.; Fumo, B.; Ascierto, P.A. Cosmic radiation and cancer: Is there a link? Future Oncol. 2015, 11,
1123–1135. [CrossRef]
92.
Rahimian, N.; Razavi, Z.S.; Aslanbeigi, F.; Mirkhabbaz, A.M.; Piroozmand, H.; Shahrzad, M.K.; Hamblin, M.R.; Mirzaei, H.
Non-Coding RNAs Related to Angiogenesis in Gynecological Cancer. Gynecol. Oncol. 2021, 161, 896–912. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
28 of 31
93.
Di Fiore, R.; Suleiman, S.; Pentimalli, F.; O’Toole, S.A.; O’Leary, J.J.; Ward, M.P.; Conlon, N.T.; Sabol, M.; Ozreti´c, P.;
Erson-Bensan, A.E.; et al. Could MicroRNAs Be Useful Tools to Improve the Diagnosis and Treatment of Rare Gynecological
Cancers? A Brief Overview. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 3822. [CrossRef]
94.
Mandilaras, V.; Karakasis, K.; Clarke, B.; Amit Oza, A.; Lheureux, S. Rare tumors in gynaecological cancers and the lack of
therapeutic options and clinical trials. Expert Opin. Orphan Drugs 2017, 5, 71–83. [CrossRef]
95.
Xie, W.; Sun, H.; Li, X.; Lin, F.; Wang, Z.; Wang, X. Ovarian cancer: Epigenetics, drug resistance, and progression. Cancer Cell Int.
2021, 21, 434. [CrossRef]
96.
Hosseini, E.S.; Meryet-Figuiere, M.; Sabzalipoor, H.; Kashani, H.H.; Nikzad, H.; Asemi, Z. Dysregulated expression of long
noncoding RNAs in gynecologic cancers. Mol. Cancer 2017, 16, 107. [CrossRef]
97.
Mota, A.; Oltra, S.S.; Moreno-Bueno, G. Insight updating of the molecular hallmarks in ovarian carcinoma. EJC Suppl. 2020,
15, 16–26. [CrossRef]
98.
Vaughan, S.; Coward, J.I.; Bast, R.C., Jr.; Berchuck, A.; Berek, J.S.; Brenton, J.D.; Coukos, G.; Crum, C.C.; Drapkin, R.;
Etemadmoghadam, D.; et al. Rethinking ovarian cancer: Recommendations for improving outcomes. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2011, 11,
719–725. [CrossRef]
99.
Bowtell, D.D.; Böhm, S.; Ahmed, A.A.; Aspuria, P.J.; Bast, R.C., Jr.; Beral, V.; Berek, J.S.; Birrer, M.J.; Blagden, S.;
Bookman, M.A.; et al. Rethinking ovarian cancer II: Reducing mortality from high-grade serous ovarian cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer
2015, 15, 668–679. [CrossRef]
100. Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2019. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2019, 69, 7–34. [CrossRef]
101. Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Fuchs, H.E.; Jemal, A. Cancer Statistics, 2021. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2021, 71, 7–33. [CrossRef]
102. Hull, R.; Mbele, M.; Makhafola, T.; Hicks, C.; Wang, S.M.; Reis, R.M.; Mehrotra, R.; Mkhize-Kwitshana, Z.; Kibiki, G.;
Bates, D.O.; et al. Cervical cancer in low and middle-income countries. Oncol. Lett. 2020, 20, 2058–2074. [CrossRef]
103. Frazer, I.H. Prevention of cervical cancer through papillomavirus vaccination. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2004, 4, 46–54. [CrossRef]
104. Kokka, F.; Bryant, A.; Brockbank, E.; Jeyarajah, A. Surgical treatment of stage IA2 cervical cancer. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.
2014, 5, CD010870. [CrossRef]
105. Louie, K.S.; de Sanjosé, S.; Diaz, M.; Castellsagué, X.; Herrero, R.; Meijer, C.J.; Shah, K.; Franceschi, S.; Muñoz, N.; Bosch, F.X.
International Agency for Research on Cancer Multicenter Cervical Cancer Study Group. Early age at ﬁrst sexual intercourse and
early pregnancy are risk factors for cervical cancer in developing countries. Br. J. Cancer 2009, 100, 1191–1197. [CrossRef]
106. Liu, Z.C.; Liu, W.D.; Liu, Y.H.; Ye, X.H.; Chen, S.D. Multiple Sexual Partners as a Potential Independent Risk Factor for Cervical
Cancer: A Meta-analysis of Epidemiological Studies. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 2015, 16, 3893–3900. [CrossRef]
107. Husain, R.S.; Ramakrishnan, V. Global Variation of Human Papillomavirus Genotypes and Selected Genes Involved in Cervical
Malignancies. Ann. Glob. Health 2015, 81, 675–683. [CrossRef]
108. Yi, Y.; Fang, Y.; Wu, K.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, W. Comprehensive gene and pathway analysis of cervical cancer progression. Oncol. Lett.
2020, 19, 3316–3332. [CrossRef]
109. Roura, E.; Castellsagué, X.; Pawlita, M.; Travier, N.; Waterboer, T.; Margall, N.; Bosch, F.X.; de Sanjosé, S.; Dillner, J.; Gram, I.T.; et al.
Smoking as a major risk factor for cervical cancer and pre-cancer: Results from the EPIC cohort. Int. J. Cancer 2014, 135, 453–466.
[CrossRef]
110. Peirson, L.; Fitzpatrick-Lewis, D.; Ciliska, D.; Warren, R. Screening for cervical cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Syst. Rev. 2013, 2, 35. [CrossRef]
111. Xu, F.; Li, Y.; Fan, L.; Ma, J.; Yu, L.; Yi, H.; Chen, X.; Wei, W.; Wu, P.; Liang, L.; et al. Preoperative SCC-Ag and thrombocytosis as
predictive markers for pelvic lymphatic metastasis of squamous cervical cancer in early FIGO stage. J. Cancer 2018, 9, 1660–1666.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. Nanthamongkolkul, K.; Hanprasertpong, J. Predictive Factors of Pelvic Lymph Node Metastasis in Early-Stage Cervical Cancer.
Oncol. Res. Treat. 2018, 41, 194–198. [CrossRef]
113. Wright, J.D.; Huang, Y.; Ananth, C.V.; Tergas, A.I.; Duffy, C.; Deutsch, I.; Burke, W.M.; Hou, J.Y.; Neugut, A.I.; Hershman, D.L.
Inﬂuence of treatment center and hospital volume on survival for locally advanced cervical cancer. Gynecol. Oncol. 2015, 139,
506–512. [CrossRef]
114. Vaccarella, S.; Lortet-Tieulent, J.; Plummer, M.; Franceschi, S.; Bray, F. Worldwide trends in cervical cancer incidence: Impact of
screening against changes in disease risk factors. Eur. J. Cancer 2013, 49, 3262–3273. [CrossRef]
115. Jemal, A.; Bray, F.; Center, M.M.; Ferlay, J.; Ward, E.; Forman, D. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2011, 61, 69–90.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Ferlay, J.; Soerjomataram, I.; Dikshit, R.; Eser, S.; Mathers, C.; Rebelo, M.; Parkin, D.M.; Forman, D.; Bray, F. Cancer incidence and
mortality worldwide: Sources, methods and major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int. J. Cancer 2015, 136, E359–E386. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
117. Di Fiore, R.; Suleiman, S.; Drago-Ferrante, R.; Felix, A.; O’Toole, S.A.; O’Leary, J.J.; Ward, M.P.; Beirne, J.; Yordanov, A.; Vasileva-
Slaveva, M.; et al. LncRNA MORT (ZNF667-AS1) in Cancer—Is There a Possible Role in Gynecological Malignancies? Int. J. Mol.
Sci. 2021, 22, 7829. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Yasin, H.K.; Taylor, A.H.; Ayakannu, T. A Narrative Review of the Role of Diet and Lifestyle Factors in the Development and
Prevention of Endometrial Cancer. Cancers 2021, 13, 2149. [CrossRef]
119. Lu, K.H.; Broaddus, R.R. Endometrial Cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 2020, 383, 2053–2064. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
29 of 31
120. Evrard, C.; Alexandre, J. Predictive and Prognostic Value of Microsatellite Instability in Gynecologic Cancer (Endometrial and
Ovarian). Cancers 2021, 13, 2434. [CrossRef]
121. Lax, S.F. Molecular genetic pathways in various types of endometrial carcinoma: From a phenotypical to a molecular-based
classiﬁcation. Virchows Arch. 2004, 444, 213–223. [CrossRef]
122. Lax, S.F.; Kendall, B.; Tashiro, H.; Slebos, R.J.; Hedrick, L. The frequency of p53, K-ras mutations, and microsatellite instability
differs in uterine endometrioid and serous carcinoma: Evidence of distinct molecular genetic pathways. Cancer 2000, 88, 814–824.
[CrossRef]
123. Morice, P.; Leary, A.; Creutzberg, C.; Abu-Rustum, N.; Darai, E. Endometrial cancer. Lancet 2016, 387, 1094–1108. [CrossRef]
124. Di Tucci, C.; Capone, C.; Galati, G.; Iacobelli, V.; Schiavi, M.C.; Di Donato, V.; Muzii, L.; Panici, P.B. Immunotherapy in endometrial
cancer: New scenarios on the horizon. J. Gynecol. Oncol. 2019, 30, e46. [CrossRef]
125. Siegel, R.L.; Miller, K.D.; Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2020. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2020, 70, 7–30. [CrossRef]
126. Daling, J.R.; Madeleine, M.M.; Schwartz, S.M.; Shera, K.A.; Carter, J.J.; McKnight, B.; Porter, P.L.; Galloway, D.A.; McDougall, J.K.;
Tamimi, H. A population-based study of squamous cell vaginal cancer: HPV and cofactors. Gynecol. Oncol. 2002, 84, 263–270.
[CrossRef]
127. Saraiya, M.; Watson, M.; Wu, X.; King, J.B.; Chen, V.W.; Smith, J.S.; Giuliano, A.R. Incidence of in situ and invasive vulvar cancer
in the US, 1998–2003. Cancer 2008, 113, 2865–2872. [CrossRef]
128. Shah, C.A.; Goff, B.A.; Lowe, K.; Peters, W.A., 3rd; Li, C.I. Factors affecting risk of mortality in women with vaginal cancer. Obstet.
Gynecol. 2009, 113, 1038–1045. [CrossRef]
129. How, J.A.; Jazaeri, A.A.; Soliman, P.T.; Fleming, N.D.; Gong, J.; Piha-Paul, S.A.; Janku, F.; Stephen, B.; Naing, A. Pembrolizumab
in vaginal and vulvar squamous cell carcinoma: A case series from a phase II basket trial. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 3667. [CrossRef]
130. Krüger, M.; Bauer, J.; Grimm, D. Cancer Research in Space. In Biotechnology in Space; Ruyters, G., Betzel, C., Grimm, D., Eds.;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 87–106.
131. Grimm, D.; Schulz, H.; Krüger, M.; Cortés-Sánchez, J.L.; Egli, M.; Kraus, A.; Sahana, J.; Corydon, T.J.; Hemmersbach, R.;
Wise, P.M.; et al. The Fight against Cancer by Microgravity: The Multicellular Spheroid as a Metastasis Model. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2022, 23, 3073. [CrossRef]
132. Becker, J.L.; Souza, G.R. Using space-based investigations to inform cancer research on Earth. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2013, 13, 315–327.
[CrossRef]
133. Mehner, C.; Krishnan, S.; Chou, J.; Freeman, M.L.; Freeman, W.D.; Patel, T.; Turnbull, M.T. Real versus simulated galactic cosmic
radiation for investigating cancer risk in the hematopoietic system-are we comparing apples to apples? Life Sci. Space Res.
2021, 29, 8–14. [CrossRef]
134. Becker, J.L.; Prewett, T.L.; Spaulding, G.F.; Goodwin, T.J. Three-dimensional growth and differentiation of ovarian tumor cell line
in high aspect rotating-wall vessel: Morphologic and embryologic considerations. J. Cell Biochem. 1993, 51, 283–289. [CrossRef]
135. Goodwin, T.J.; Prewett, T.L.; Spaulding, G.F.; Becker, J.L. Three-dimensional culture of a mixed mullerian tumor of the ovary:
Expression of in vivo characteristics. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 1997, 33, 366–374. [CrossRef]
136. Hammond, D.K.; Becker, J.; Elliott, T.F.; Holubee, K.; Baker, T.L.; Love, J.E. Antigenic protein in microgravity-grown human
mixed Mullerian ovarian tumor (LN1) cells preserved in RNA stabilizing agent. Gravit. Space Biol. Bull. 2005, 18, 99–100.
137. Przystupski, D.; Górska, A.; Szewczyk, A.; Drag-Zalensinka, M.; Kulbacka, J. 3D Clinorotation Affects Drug Sensitivity of Human
Ovarian Cancer Cells. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 2021, 33, 42. [CrossRef]
138. Mukhopadhyay, S.; Saha, R.; Palanisamy, A.; Ghosh, M.; Biswas, A.; Roy, S.; Pal, A.; Sarkar, K.; Bagh, S. A systems biology
pipeline identiﬁes new immune and disease related molecular signatures and networks in human cells during microgravity
exposure. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 25975. [CrossRef]
139. Watanabe, H.; Ogiu, T.; Nishizaki, M.; Fujimoto, N.; Kido, S.; Ishimura, Y.; Shiraki, K.; Kuramoto, K.; Hirata, S.; Shoji, S.; et al.
Induction of ovarian tumors by heavy ion irradiation in B6C3F1 mice. Oncol. Rep. 1998, 5, 1377–1380. [CrossRef]
140. Watanabe, H.; Ogiu, T.; Nishimura, M.; Masaoka, Y.; Kurosumi, M.; Takahashi, T.; Oguri, T.; Shoji, S.; Katoh, O. Comparison of
tumorigenesis between accelerated heavy ion and X-ray in B6C3F1 mice. J. Radiat. Res. 1998, 39, 93–100. [CrossRef]
141. Nitta, Y.; Hoshi, M. Relationship between oocyte apoptosis and ovarian tumours induced by high and low LET radiations in mice.
Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2003, 79, 241–250. [CrossRef]
142. Mishra, B.; Lawson, G.W.; Ripperdan, R.; Ortiz, L.; Luderer, U. Charged-Iron-Particles Found in Galactic Cosmic Rays are Potent
Inducers of Epithelial Ovarian Tumors. Radiat. Res. 2018, 190, 142–150. [CrossRef]
143. Chopra, V.; Dinh, T.V.; Hannigan, E.V. Three-dimensional endothelial-tumor epithelial cell interactions in human cervical cancers.
In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 1997, 33, 432–442. [CrossRef]
144. Kelly, S.E.; Di Benedetto, A.; Greco, A.; Howard, C.M.; Sollars, V.E.; Primerano, D.A.; Valluri, J.V.; Claudio, P.P. Rapid selection
and proliferation of CD133+ cells from cancer cell lines: Chemotherapeutic implications. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e10035. [CrossRef]
145. Zhang, Z.J.; Tong, Y.Q.; Wang, J.J.; Yang, C.; Zhou, G.H.; Li, Y.H.; Xie, P.L.; Hu, J.Y.; Li, G.C. Spaceﬂight alters the gene expression
proﬁle of cervical cancer cells. Chin. J. Cancer 2011, 30, 842–852. [CrossRef]
146. Guo, F.; Li, Y.; Liu, Y.; Huang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, J.; Li, Y.; Hu, J.; Li, G. Identiﬁcation of genes associated with tumor development
in CaSki cells in the cosmic space. Mol. Biol. Rep. 2012, 39, 6923–6931. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
147. de Martel, C.; Plummer, M.; Vignat, J.; Franceschi, S. Worldwide burden of cancer attributable to HPV by site, country and HPV
type. Int. J. Cancer 2017, 141, 664–670. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
30 of 31
148. Maglennon, G.A.; Doorbar, J. The biology of papillomavirus latency. Open Virol. J. 2012, 6, 190–197. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
149. Guidry, J.T.; Scott, R.S. The interaction between human papillomavirus and other viruses. Virus Res. 2017, 231, 139–147. [CrossRef]
150. Mehta, S.K.; Laudenslager, M.L.; Stowe, R.P.; Crucian, B.E.; Feiveson, A.H.; Sams, C.F.; Pierson, D.L. Latent virus reactivation in
astronauts on the international space station. NPJ Microgravity 2017, 3, 11. [CrossRef]
151. Bigley, A.B.; Agha, N.H.; Baker, F.L.; Spielmann, G.; Kunz, H.E.; Mylabathula, P.L.; Rooney, B.V.; Laughlin, M.S.; Mehta, S.K.;
Pierson, D.L.; et al. NK cell function is impaired during long-duration spaceﬂight. J. Appl. Physiol. 2019, 126, 842–853. [CrossRef]
152. Martinez, E.M.; Yoshida, M.C.; Candelario, T.L.; Hughes-Fulford, M. Spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity cause a signiﬁcant
reduction of key gene expression in early T-cell activation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2015, 308, R480–R488.
[CrossRef]
153. Rooney, B.V.; Crucian, B.E.; Pierson, D.L.; Laudenslager, M.L.; Mehta, S.K. Herpes Virus Reactivation in Astronauts during
Spaceﬂight and Its Application on Earth. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 16. [CrossRef]
154. Jennings, R.T.; Baker, E.S. Gynecological and reproductive issues for women in space: A review. Obstet. Gynecol. Surv. 2000, 55,
109–116. [CrossRef]
155. Cho, H.J.; Baek, M.O.; Khaliq, S.A.; Chon, S.J.; Son, K.H.; Lee, S.H.; Yoon, M.S. Microgravity inhibits decidualization via decreasing
Akt activity and FOXO3a expression in human endometrial stromal cells. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 12094. [CrossRef]
156. Grun, B.; Benjamin, E.; Sinclair, J.; Timms, J.F.; Jacobs, I.J.; Gayther, S.A.; Dafou, D. Three-dimensional in vitro cell biology models
of ovarian and endometrial cancer. Cell Prolif. 2009, 42, 219–228. [CrossRef]
157. Palumbo, G.; Varriale, L.; Paba, V.; Sasso, A.; Crescenzi, E.; Gialanella, G.; Grossi, G.; Pugliese, M.G.; Scampoli, P. Effect of space
radiation on expression of apoptosis-related genes in endometrial cells: A preliminary study. Phys. Med. 2001, 17 (Suppl. S1),
241–246.
158. Jennings, R.; Baker, E. Gynecologic and Reproductive Concerns. In Principles of Clinical Medicine for Space Flight; Barratt, M.R.,
Pool, S.L., Eds.; Springer Science & Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 2008; Chapter 18; pp. 381–390.
159. Werneth, C.M.; Slaba, T.C.; Huff, J.L.; Patel, Z.S.; Simonsen, L.C. Medical Countermeasure Requirements to Meet NASA’s Space
Radiation Permissible Exposure Limits for a Mars Mission Scenario. Health Phys. 2022, 123, 116–127. [CrossRef]
160. Kim, M.J.; Kim, J.J.; Kim, S.M. Endometrial evaluation with transvaginal ultrasonography for the screening of endometrial
hyperplasia or cancer in premenopausal and perimenopausal women. Obstet. Gynecol. Sci. 2016, 59, 192–200. [CrossRef]
161. Steller, J.G.; Blue, R.; Zahner, C.; Frisch, E.H.; Bayuse, T.; Auñon-Chancellor, S.; Jennings, R.T. Menstrual management considera-
tions in the space environment. Reach 2021, 23–24, 100044. [CrossRef]
162. Bogomolov, V.V.; Castrucci, F.; Comtois, J.M.; Damann, V.; Davis, J.R.; Duncan, J.M.; Johnston, S.L.; Gray, G.W.; Grigoriev, A.I.;
Koike, Y.; et al. International Space Station medical standards and certiﬁcation for space ﬂight participants. Aviat. Space Environ.
Med. 2007, 78, 1162–1169.
163. Barthel, J.; Sarigul-Klijn, N. A review of radiation shielding needs and concepts for space voyages beyond Earth’s magnetic
inﬂuence. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 2019, 110, 100553. [CrossRef]
164. Montesinos, C.A.; Khalid, R.; Cristea, O.; Greenberger, J.S.; Epperly, M.W.; Lemon, J.A.; Boreham, D.R.; Popov, D.; Gorthi, G.;
Ramkumar, N.; et al. Space Radiation Protection Countermeasures in Microgravity and Planetary Exploration. Life 2021, 11, 829.
[CrossRef]
165. Reliene, R.; Pollard, J.M.; Sobol, Z.; Trouiller, B.; Gatti, R.A.; Schiestl, R.H. N-acetyl cysteine protects against ionizing radiation-
induced DNA damage but not against cell killing in yeast and mammals. Mutat. Res. 2009, 665, 37–43. [CrossRef]
166. Wang, Y.; Li, L.; Fan, L.H.; Jing, Y.; Li, J.; Ouyang, Y.C.; Wang, Z.B.; Hou, Y.; Sun, Q.Y. N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) delays
post-ovulatory oocyte aging in mouse. Aging 2019, 11, 2020–2030. [CrossRef]
167. Mendelev, N.; Mehta, S.L.; Idris, H.; Kumari, S.; Li, P.A. Selenite stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis signaling and enhances
mitochondrial functional performance in murine hippocampal neuronal cells. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e47910. [CrossRef]
168. McKenzie, R.C.; Beckett, G.J.; Arthur, J.R. Effects of selenium on immunity and aging. In Selenium: Its Molecular Biology and Role in
Human Health, 2nd ed.; Hatﬁeld, D.L., Berry, M.J., Gladyshev, V.N., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2006; pp. 311–323.
169. Suzuki, T.; Suzuki, T.; Wada, T.; Saigo, K.; Watanabe, K. Taurine as a constituent of mitochondrial tRNAs: New insights into the
functions of taurine and human mitochondrial diseases. EMBO J. 2002, 21, 6581–6589. [CrossRef]
170. Pisoschi, A.M.; Pop, A. The role of antioxidants in the chemistry of oxidative stress: A review. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2015, 97, 55–74.
[CrossRef]
171. Hashimoto, T.; Horikawa, D.D.; Saito, Y.; Kuwahara, H.; Kozuka-Hata, H.; Shin-I, T.; Minakuchi, Y.; Ohishi, K.; Motoyama, A.;
Aizu, T.; et al. Extremotolerant tardigrade genome and improved radiotolerance of human cultured cells by tardigrade-unique
protein. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12808. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Sanzari, J.K.; Krigsfeld, G.S.; Shuman, A.L.; Diener, A.K.; Lin, L.; Mai, W.; Kennedy, A.R. Effects of a granulocyte colony
stimulating factor, Neulasta, in mini pigs exposed to total body proton irradiation. Life Sci. Space Res. 2015, 5, 13–20. [CrossRef]
173. Bahamondes, L.; Valeria Bahamondes, M.; Shulman, L.P. Non-contraceptive beneﬁts of hormonal and intrauterine reversible
contraceptive methods. Hum. Reprod. Update 2015, 21, 640–651. [CrossRef]
174. Asthana, S.; Busa, V.; Labani, S. Oral contraceptives use and risk of cervical cancer—A systematic review & meta-analysis. Eur. J.
Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. 2020, 247, 163–175.
175. Iversen, L.; Fielding, S.; Lidegaard, Ø.; Hannaford, P.C. Contemporary hormonal contraception and cervical cancer in women of
reproductive age. Int. J. Cancer 2021, 149, 769–777. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 7465
31 of 31
176. Cogliano, V.; Baan, R.; Straif, K.; Grosse, Y.; Secretan, B.; El Ghissassi, F.; WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Carcinogenicity of human papillomaviruses. Lancet Oncol. 2005, 6, 204. [CrossRef]
177. Cibula, D.; Gompel, A.; Mueck, A.O.; La Vecchia, C.; Hannaford, P.C.; Skouby, S.O.; Zikan, M.; Dusek, L. Hormonal contraception
and risk of cancer. Hum. Reprod. Update 2010, 16, 631–650. [CrossRef]
178. Mørch, L.S.; Hannaford, P.C.; Lidegaard, Ø. Contemporary Hormonal Contraception and the Risk of Breast Cancer. N. Engl J.
Med. 2018, 378, 1265–1266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Conz, L.; Mota, B.S.; Bahamondes, L.; Teixeira Dória, M.; Françoise Mauricette Derchain, S.; Rieira, R.; Sarian, L.O. Levonorgestrel-
releasing intrauterine system and breast cancer risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 2020, 99,
970–982. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
180. Greenberger, J.S. Radioprotection. In Vivo 2009, 23, 323–336. [PubMed]
181. Belli, M.; Tabocchini, M.A. Ionizing Radiation-Induced Epigenetic Modiﬁcations and Their Relevance to Radiation Protection. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 5993. [CrossRef]
182. Daly, M.B.; Pilarski, R.; Yurgelun, M.B.; Berry, M.P.; Buys, S.S.; Dickson, P.; Domchek, S.M.; Elkhanany, A.; Friedman, S.;
Garber, J.E.; et al. NCCN Guidelines Insights: Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Breast, Ovarian, and Pancreatic,
Version 1.2020. J. Natl. Compr. Canc. Netw. 2020, 18, 380–391. [CrossRef]
183. Nuñez, J.K.; Chen, J.; Pommier, G.C.; Cogan, J.Z.; Replogle, J.M.; Adriaens, C.; Ramadoss, G.N.; Shi, Q.; Hung, K.L.;
Samelson, A.J.; et al. Genome-wide programmable transcriptional memory by CRISPR-based epigenome editing. Cell 2021, 184,
2503–2519.e17. [CrossRef]
184. Liu, G.; Lin, Q.; Jin, S.; Gao, C. The CRISPR-Cas toolbox and gene editing technologies. Mol. Cell. 2022, 82, 333–347. [CrossRef]
185. Berrios, D.C.; Galazka, J.; Grigorev, K.; Gebre, S.; Costes, S.V. NASA GeneLab: Interfaces for the exploration of space omics data.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2021, 49, D1515–D1522. [CrossRef]
186. Datta, K.; Hyduke, D.R.; Suman, S.; Moon, B.H.; Johnson, M.D.; Fornace, A.J., Jr. Exposure to ionizing radiation induced persistent
gene expression changes in mousemammary gland. Radiat. Oncol. 2012, 7, 205. [CrossRef]
