FORUM ORIGINAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATION
Functional Consequences of Radiation-Induced Oxidative
Stress in Cultured Neural Stem Cells and the Brain
Exposed to Charged Particle Irradiation
Bertrand P. Tseng,1 Erich Giedzinski,2 Atefeh Izadi,2 Tatiana Suarez,2 Mary L. Lan,2 Katherine K. Tran,2
Munjal M. Acharya,2 Gregory A. Nelson,3 Jacob Raber,4 Vipan K. Parihar,2 and Charles L. Limoli2
Abstract
Aims: Redox homeostasis is critical in regulating the fate and function of multipotent cells in the central nervous
system (CNS). Here, we investigated whether low dose charged particle irradiation could elicit oxidative stress
in neural stem and precursor cells and whether radiation-induced changes in redox metabolism would coincide
with cognitive impairment. Results: Low doses ( < 1 Gy) of charged particles caused an acute and persistent
oxidative stress. Early after ( < 1 week) irradiation, increased levels of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species were
generally dose responsive, but were less dependent on dose weeks to months thereafter. Exposure to ion
ﬂuences resulting in less than one ion traversal per cell was sufﬁcient to elicit radiation-induced oxidative stress.
Whole body irradiation triggered a compensatory response in the rodent brain that led to a signiﬁcant increase in
antioxidant capacity 2 weeks following exposure, before returning to background levels at week 4. Low dose
irradiation was also found to signiﬁcantly impair novel object recognition in mice 2 and 12 weeks following
irradiation. Innovation: Data provide evidence that acute exposure of neural stem cells and the CNS to very low
doses and ﬂuences of charged particles can elicit a persisting oxidative stress lasting weeks to months that is
associated with impaired cognition. Conclusions: Exposure to low doses of charged particles causes a persistent
oxidative stress and cognitive impairment over protracted times. Data suggest that astronauts subjected to space
radiation may develop a heightened risk for mission critical performance decrements in space, along with a risk
of developing long-term neurocognitive sequelae. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 20, 1410–1422.
Introduction
T
ravel to space necessitates exposure to radiation ﬁelds
containing a spectrum of charged particles having dif-
ferent ﬂuences and energies (15). These fully ionized particles
range from protons to iron ions and are derived from solar
emissions including periodic ﬂares (mainly protons) along
with the galactic cosmic rays (High Z and Energy [HZE]
particles). Exposure to such radiation poses a risk that will be
proportional to the frequency of particle traversals and the
radiation quality (i.e., linear energy transfer [LET]) of that
particle (6, 20), although for many central nervous system
(CNS) endpoints this relationship is overly simplistic. While
energetic protons have relatively low LET, HZE particles
typically found in space have much larger LET values that
depend on the mass and energy of the ion. These highly en-
ergetic (MeV-GeV/n) particles can cause signiﬁcant cellular
damage by direct traversal through tissues of the body and via
secondary ionizations caused by delta rays emanating from
the track core (14, 41).
The high and low LET characteristics of HZE particles
imply that heavy ions can elicit not only extensive damage in
cells directly incurring traversals (i.e., along the particle tra-
jectory), but also wide-ranging damage to cells more distal to
1Department of Internal Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.
2Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California.
3Departments of Radiation Medicine and Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, California.
4Departments of Behavioral Neuroscience and Neurology, Division of Neuroscience, ONPRC, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon.
ANTIOXIDANTS & REDOX SIGNALING
Volume 20, Number 9, 2014
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ars.2012.5134
1410

the track of the particle (14, 41). In either case, exposure of
neural stem cells and their differentiated progeny to these
radiation types can elicit oxidative stress with a range of po-
tentially adverse consequences. Past work characterizing the
radioresponse of neural stem and precursor cells exposed to
HZE particles has shown that changes in oxidative stress and
cell killing are generally enhanced and more prolonged when
compared with lower LET radiation modalities (25, 32, 33).
We have documented the capability of ionizing radiation to
elicit increased oxidative stress in several types of neural stem
and precursor cells (1, 29, 32, 33). Increased reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) detected
after exposure to different radiation modalities have in gen-
eral, been shown to be both dose-dependent and temporally
persistent, albeit after relatively higher ( ‡ 1 Gy) doses (25, 32).
Past reports have typically used such higher doses, but do
not represent realistic exposures that might be encountered
during a short mission to the moon, or an even longer mission
in space outside the protection of the Earth’s magnetosphere
(16, 32).
The paucity of heavy ion data collected after more realistic
exposure scenarios ( £ 1 Gy) prompted the current studies,
aimed at determining the short- and long-term consequences
of exposing neural stem and precursor cells to very low doses
and particle ﬂuences of 56Fe ions. Here, we report that neural
stem and precursor cells exposed to very low doses and ﬂu-
ences of charged particles exhibit signiﬁcant and prolonged
increases in oxidative stress, changes that are temporally co-
incident with altered cognition.
Results
Stem and precursor cell survival following
charged particle exposure
Neurosphere cultures maintained over time contain mix-
tures of precursor cells derived from much smaller proportions
of stem cells. Cell counts made from irradiated cultures mea-
sure the proliferative potential of the surviving precursor cell
population that predominate the bulk culture. Irradiation of
neurosphere cultures reduces the number of cells in a dose-
responsive manner, with a D37 of 1.8 Gy in the low dose range
( £ 2 Gy, Fig. 1, solid line). At higher doses bulk cell counts were
less responsive to dose. Sphere formation was surprisingly
resistant to charged particle irradiation, as the formation of
spheres showed little dependence on the incident dose (Fig. 1,
dashed line). While these assays measure different endpoints,
data does suggest that neurosphere cultures contain popula-
tions of cells with different sensitivities to charged particle
irradiation, likely due to the presence of partially committed
stem cell progeny at various states of differentiation.
Low dose charged particle-induced oxidative stress
To determine the consequences of low dose charged par-
ticle exposure on the redox state of neural stem and precursor
cells, cultures were exposed to multiple doses of 600 MeV/n
Fe ions and analyzed over short (days) and long (weeks)
postirradiation intervals for changes in oxidative stress. Ex-
tensive controls conducted throughout these studies using a
cell-permeant oxidized analog of CM-H2DCFDA (i.e., car-
boxy-DCFDA) indicated that measurements of radiation-
induced oxidative stress were not caused by differences in dye
uptake, esterase cleavage, and/or retention of the dye be-
tween the experimental groups.
Neurospheres exposed to 1–15 cGy of Fe ions exhibit a
dose-dependent and signiﬁcant rise in ROS/RNS as detected
by the oxidation of the CM-H2DCFDA analog 12 and 24 h
after exposure (Fig. 2). At the earlier time, oxidative stress was
observed to rise steadily with dose, reaching a sixfold peak
after 15 cGy. At the latter time, signiﬁcant dose-dependent
increases in ROS/RNS were found as doses were escalated to
Innovation
Studies were conducted to determine whether space-
relevant ﬂuences of High Z and Energy (HZE) particles
could elicit long-lasting changes in the redox state of neural
stem and precursor cells that are critical for maintaining
cognitive health. Data suggest that relatively infrequent
HZE events may elicit chronic changes in the physiology of
such cells. To the extent that altered redox state elicits
functional changes in the central nervous system, then our
ﬁndings suggest that astronauts may have a heightened
risk for mission critical performance decrements in space,
along with a risk of developing longer-term cognitive se-
quelae upon return to the terrestrial environment.
FIG. 1.
Cell survival and sphere formation following
charged particle exposure. Neural stem and precursor cells
subjected to iron ion irradiation were analyzed 5 days later
for cell counts and sphere formation. The surviving fraction
represents the number of cells (solid line) or spheres (dashed
line) corrected for seeding density and normalized to unir-
radiated controls. Error bars represent the mean – S.E.M. of
three to four independent measurements. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.001
for differences between precursor cells and spheres.
HEAVY ION-INDUCED OXIDATIVE STRESS IN NEURAL STEM CELLS
1411

3 cGy, after which ROS/RNS levels were found to plateau
approximately fourfold over sham-irradiated controls (Fig. 2).
The marked low dose-responsive character of radiation-
induced oxidative stress in neural stem and precursor cells
suggested these cells were exquisitely sensitive to irradiation.
To determine whether very low ion ﬂuences could elicit
measureable changes in reactive species, a modiﬁed dosim-
etry was used to quantify the number of ions/cm2. At these
low ion ﬂuences, not every cell incurs an incident ion tra-
versal, so reference to dose becomes less meaningful. Ex-
posure of neurosphere cultures to these very low ion ﬂuences
was still found to elicit elevated oxidative stress at similar
acute postirradiation times (Fig. 3). Increased levels of
ROS and RNS probed through the use of CM-H2DCFDA and
4-amino-5-methylamino-2¢,7¢-diﬂuoroﬂuorescein
diacetate
(DAF) dyes respectively, showed variable ﬂuence dependent
responses 6 h (Fig. 3A) and 24 h (Fig. 3B) after exposures
ranging from 500–30,000 Fe ions/cm2. Fluences as low as
500–3000 ions/cm2 were found to elicit increased oxidative
stress at most postirradiation times, where ﬂuence responses
£ 1000 ions/cm2 are shown at expanded scale (Fig. 3A1, B1).
At 6 h postirradiation ROS and RNS levels rose to 2.5 and 2.1-
fold over unirradiated controls respectively, after exposure to
30,000 ions/cm2. One day following low ﬂuence exposures
cells exhibited a rapid rise in ROS/RNS levels at lower
ﬂuences ( £ 3000 ions/cm2). At higher ﬂuences, RNS levels
continued to rise while ROS levels reached a plateau
(Fig. 3B). The increased oxidative stress found after low ion
ﬂuences was not the consequence of a highly ﬂuorescent
subpopulation of cells, since data represent the mean ﬂuo-
rescence of all cells analyzed, gated only to eliminate debris
and dead cells.
Neural stem and precursor cells subjected to similar low
ﬂuences of 56Fe ions and analyzed over longer postirradiation
intervals (36–48 h) routinely showed trends toward increased
oxidative species (ROS/RNS) compared with sham-irradi-
ated controls (Fig. 4). This was particularly evident for ROS
(Fig. 4A) and at higher ﬂuences levels for RNS (Fig. 4B). At
these longer postirradiation intervals the oxidative stress re-
sponse was more complex and did not show the same de-
pendence on ﬂuence. Relative levels of ROS were in general
found to be higher than the relative levels of RNS measured at
these times. Low ﬂuence data indicate that very low numbers
of ion traversals incurred in a population of irradiated neural
stem and precursor cells is sufﬁcient to promote a state of
oxidative stress.
Persistent oxidative stress after low dose
charged particle irradiation
The marked sensitivity of neural stem and precursor cells to
changes in redox state caused by low dose charged particle
irradiation has indicated that exposure to realistic doses ( £ 1
Gy) of space radiation can induce oxidative stress. To deter-
mine the persistence of such radiation-induced effects, neu-
rospheres subjected to iron ion irradiation at Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL) were analyzed over the course of
2 months. Neurosphere cultures maintained over these ex-
tended postirradiation intervals show a marked persistence of
radiation-induced oxidative stress (Fig. 5). Analyses of cells
loaded with CM-H2DCFDA indicate that compared to unir-
radiated controls, there is a trend toward increasing oxidative
stress at each of the postirradiation times (Fig. 5A). Dose-
responsive increases in ROS/RNS levels are observed 1 and
4 weeks after irradiation, a trend that then breaks down 6 and
8 weeks after initial exposure. The wide variability found in
many samples is not unexpected, given the protracted nature
of these measurements.
In parallel experiments, cells were also analyzed using the
Mitosox dye to assess the level of superoxide persisting after
charged particle exposures (Fig. 5B). Compared to data col-
lected with the CM-H2DCFDA dye, qualitatively similar in-
creases in superoxide levels were found after the same doses
and postirradiation intervals. Superoxide levels were pro-
portional to dose at earlier times ( £ 4 weeks), and less so at
latter postirradiation times ( ‡ 6 weeks), while overall changes
were less pronounced when compared to ROS/RNS levels.
While variability between replicate samples precluded sig-
niﬁcance of all data sets shown, there was a clear trend toward
elevated superoxide at all postirradiation times.
In a separate series of experiments conducted over two
experimental campaigns at BNL, analogous experiments were
run to quantify any long-lasting changes in the level of nitric
oxide (NO) after low dose charged particle exposures. Neu-
rospheres subjected to similar doses and analyzed over the
course of 5 weeks were found to exhibit increased NO levels
(Fig. 5C). Dose-responsive increases were most notable 3
weeks after irradiation, while the extent of increased radia-
tion-induced NO levels was similar in magnitude to those
increases noted for superoxide. As with the other protracted
postirradiation analyses, changes did not reach statistical
signiﬁcance when compared to sham-irradiated controls, al-
though trends of increased NO were evident at several time
points (Fig. 5C).
FIG. 2.
Dose-response for oxidative stress after low dose
irradiation of neural stem and precursor cells with 600
MeV/n 56Fe ions. Neurospheres were irradiated from 1–15
cGy and analyzed for increased ROS/RNS using the redox-
sensitive dye CM-H2DCFDA 12 and 24 h afterward. Com-
pared to sham-irradiated controls, low dose exposure elicited
a dose-responsive increase in oxidative stress at each post-
irradiation time. All data expressed as mean – S.E.M. of three
to four independent observations and normalized to unir-
radiated controls set to unity. One-way ANOVA is signiﬁ-
cant
( p < 0.0001)
and
**p < 0.001.
ANOVA,
analysis
of
variance; ROS, reactive oxygen species; RNS, reactive nitro-
gen species.
1412
TSENG ET AL.

In vivo measurement of antioxidant capacity
To assess the potential impact of irradiation on the anti-
oxidant capacity of the brain, neural tissue isolated from mice
subjected to low dose whole body irradiation was subjected to
a battery of assays to quantify the activities of selected anti-
oxidants. Brains isolated from animals given 0.1 or 1.0 Gy of
c-irradiation were analyzed for changes in antioxidant levels
and enzyme activities 2 and 4 weeks after exposure. At 2
weeks postirradiation there was a signiﬁcant drop (53%,
p < 0.001) in the percentage of glutathione expressed as the
disulﬁde form (GSSG) at each dose compared with unirradi-
ated controls (Fig. 6A). This value trended higher by 4 weeks,
where the percentage of GSSG was increased by 19% and 12%
after 0.1 and 1.0 Gy respectively (Fig. 6A). When expressed as
the ratio of GSH:GSSG (Fig. 6B), the data show a signiﬁcant
increase in reduced GSH 2 weeks following irradiation, with
a trend toward increased oxidized GSSG 4 weeks after
exposure. Catalase activity (mk units/mg) showed a dose-
responsive increase at 2 weeks, where 0.1 and 1.0 Gy doses
signiﬁcantly increased activity by 57% and 68% respectively
(Fig. 6C). At 4 weeks postirradiation catalase activity returned
to background (Fig. 6C). At the earlier 2-week time, SOD ac-
tivities (U/mg protein) trended higher, with signiﬁcant in-
creases of 34% ( p < 0.007) and 26% ( p < 0.004) for MnSOD (0.1
Gy, Fig. 6D) and Cu,Zn-SOD (1.0 Gy, Fig. 6E) respectively.
These increases translated to a signiﬁcant rise (27%, p < 0.02) in
total SOD activity 2 weeks following exposure (Fig. 6F). At the
4-week time, SOD activity was also found to return to back-
ground levels. Analysis of glutathione peroxidase (GPx) ac-
tivity also revealed signiﬁcant increases of 52% ( p < 0.0001)
and 44% ( p < 0.0001) 2 weeks following 0.1 and 1.0 Gy re-
spectively, which then declined to unirradiated control levels
by week 4 (Fig. 6G). Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) activity
measurements showed similar upward trends at both post-
irradiation times and doses, with a signiﬁcant increase of 24%
( p < 0.02) found at 2 weeks after dose of 0.1 Gy (Fig. 6H).
Collectively, data show that antioxidant levels were routinely
FIG. 3.
Low ﬂuence response for the induction of ROS/RNS after charged particle irradiation. Neurospheres were
subjected to 600 MeV/n Fe ions at low ion ﬂuences (500–30,000 particles/cm2) and assayed for ROS/RNS using the redox-
sensitive dyes CM-H2DCFDA and DAF, 6 h (A) and 24 h afterward (B). Lower ﬂuence responses are shown at expanded scale
(A1, B1). Low particle ﬂuences were found to cause dose-responsive increases in oxidative stress at each of these early
postirradiation times. All data expressed as mean – S.E.M. of three to four independent observations and normalized to
unirradiated controls set to unity. One-way ANOVA is signiﬁcant (p < 0.0001, A and p < 0.003, B) and *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01;
***p < 0.001.
HEAVY ION-INDUCED OXIDATIVE STRESS IN NEURAL STEM CELLS
1413

elevated 2 weeks after either irradiation before dropping to
controls levels 2 weeks thereafter.
Impaired novel object recognition
in 56Fe-irradiated mice
To determine whether these data were associated with
in vivo functional changes, novel object recognition (NOR)
was assessed 2 weeks after irradiation with 600 MeV/n 56Fe
particles at a dose of 10 cGy. Irradiated mice did not show any
signs of distress or physical impairments throughout testing.
Further, no motor deﬁcits were observed in the irradiated
mice during any of the cognitive tasks. Both groups (control
and irradiated) spent a comparable amount of time exploring
the two identical objects during training. During testing,
FIG. 4.
Low ﬂuence response for the induction of ROS/
RNS after charged particle irradiation. Neurospheres sub-
jected to 600 MeV/n Fe ions at low ﬂuences (500–30,000
particles/cm2) were assayed 36 and 48 h after irradiation for
ROS/RNS using the redox-sensitive dyes CM-H2DCFDA (A)
and DAF (B). At these longer postirradiation intervals, low
particle ﬂuences were still found to elicit increase in oxida-
tive stress over unirradiated controls. At these longer times
however, dose-responsive increases were less evident, and
elevated nitric oxide was apparent at only the higher ﬂu-
ences levels ( £ 30,000 particles/cm2). All data expressed as
mean – S.E.M. of three to four independent observations and
normalized to unirradiated controls set to unity. ** p < 0.05.
FIG. 5.
Persistent oxidative stress in neural precursors
exposed to 600 MeV/n 56Fe ions. Cells exposed to low dose
56Fe ion irradiation were incubated with either CM-H2DCFDA
(A), Mitosox (B), or DAF (C) and analyzed for persistent ROS/
RNS, superoxide, or nitric oxide respectively at the indicated
times. In each case a trend was observed for elevated oxidative
species that persisted over the course of 5–8 weeks. All data
were normalized to unirradiated controls set to unity. Error
bars represent mean –S.E.M. of two to three measurements.
1414
TSENG ET AL.

FIG. 6.
Antioxidant assessment in the irradiated brain. Following irradiation, brains were prepared for the measurement
of antioxidant levels (A, B) and various enzymatic activities (C–H). Irradiation with 0.1 or 1.0 Gy led to a signiﬁcant
( p < 0.0001) increase in GSH levels at 2 weeks, with a trend toward elevated GSSG at week 4 following irradiation (A, B).
Catalase (C) and SOD (D–F) activities were increased signiﬁcantly (to varying extents) 2 weeks after irradiation, but not at
week 4. GPx and GST activities followed similar trends (G, H). GPx, glutathione peroxidase; GST, glutathione-S-transferase.
p-values: *, 0.02; **, 0.07; ***, 0.04; + +, 0.0002; + + +, 0.0001.
1415

sham-irradiated male mice spent signiﬁcantly more time ex-
ploring the novel object compared with the familiar object
( p < 0.05) (Fig. 7). In contrast, irradiated male mice showed no
preference for the novel object (Fig. 7).
Additional testing of the 56Fe-irradiated animals in the
Morris Water Maze (MWM) did not uncover any cognitive
deﬁcits in spatial memory retention, as both control and ir-
radiated cohorts spent equal amounts of time exploring the
target quadrant containing the escape platform for which they
were trained (data not shown). Based on these results, addi-
tional cognitive testing (NOR) was undertaken on a dedicated
cohort of animals 12 weeks after exposure to 600 MeV/n 16O
or 500 MeV/n 48Ti particles at doses of 5 and 30 cGy. Animals
subjected to 5 or 30 cGy exhibited signiﬁcant deﬁcits in NOR
when analyzed 12 weeks after exposure (Fig. 8). Animals ir-
radiated with 16O particles exhibited signiﬁcant reductions
(67%, p < 0.05) at both doses, while animals exposed to 48Ti
particles showed a signiﬁcant reduction (65%, p < 0.05) at the
higher dose and a trend for lower exploration (50%) at the
lower dose (Fig. 8). These data clearly demonstrated that low
dose exposure to charged particles leads to impaired NOR
performance over extended postirradiation times.
Discussion
Few studies have investigated the effects of charged par-
ticles on neural stem and precursor cells exposed to the low
ion ﬂuences expected on a space mission outside the earth’s
magnetosphere (21, 32). Past work from our lab has charac-
terized the radiation response of multipotent neural cells
grown as monolayers to high and low LET radiation, and has
shown that following irradiation these cells exhibit a marked
rise in acute and persistent oxidative stress that is associated
with increased apoptosis, an inhibition of cell cycle progres-
sion, and marked radiosensitivity (25, 32, 33). Our present
study extends past ﬁndings by analyzing multipotent neural
cells grown as neurospheres that were exposed to varying
doses of charged particles. Present studies also placed an
emphasis on very low ﬂuences of HZE particles more typical
of the actual space radiation environment, and on analysis
of cells over protracted postirradiation times to gauge the
long-term consequences of charged particle exposure on
astronauts.
Neurosphere cultures are heterogeneous populations of
multipotent cells, comprised of stem cells, their immediate
precursor progeny, along with smaller fractions of cells par-
tially committed to neuronal or glial fates (23). Mixed popu-
lations of multipotent cell types would be expected to possess
intrinsic differences in radiosensitivity, and past reports using
other cell systems support this hypothesis (12, 52). To uncover
potential differences in radiation sensitivity, neurosphere
cultures were subjected to higher doses of charged particles
and analyzed for overall cell survival or sphere forming ca-
pacity. Quantiﬁcation of cell counts or sphere formation 5
days following irradiation revealed a marked difference in the
sensitivity of these assays to iron ion exposure. Bulk cell
counts showed that the predominant population of neural
precursor cells was more sensitive to charged particle expo-
sure than neural stem cells. For the relatively higher doses
used in these studies, radiation-induced double-strand break
formation was the most likely cause of cell death, as opposed
to the inhibition of proliferation. While the dependence of
sphere forming assays on stem cells is not without caveats,
past work has suggested that the presence of stem cells does
promote the formation of spheres (2, 35). The capability of
irradiated cultures to re-form spheres after such high doses of
charged particles suggests that neural stem cells are more
radioresistant than their immediate progeny.
Neurospheres subjected to space relevant ﬂuences of
charged particles exhibited radiation-induced oxidative stress
that was generally found to be dose responsive at earlier
postirradiation intervals ( < 1 week). At longer times postir-
radiation, radiation-induced changes in oxidative stress were
less
linearly
dependent
on
dose
and
showed
greater
FIG. 7.
Novel object recognition of sham-irradiated and
56Fe-irradiated male mice. The DI shows reduced explor-
atory preference for the novel object over the familiar object
2-weeks after irradiation. N = 8 mice/treatment. *p < 0.05
(two-tailed t-test). DI, discrimination index.
FIG. 8.
Impaired recognition memory in mice detected 12
weeks after exposure to 16O or 48Ti particles. The NOR task
was used to calculate a DI, which shows that all irradiated
cohorts had reduced preference to explore the novel object
compared to unirradiated controls. Controls (0 Gy) showed
selective preference for the novel object (DI = 46.64 – 5.3).
Exposure to 600 MeV/n 16O particles reduced exploration of
the novel object signiﬁcantly (DI = 15.7 – 4.1, p < 0.05 at 5 cGy;
DI = 14.78 – 11.8, p < 0.05 at 30 cGy). Similarly, exposure to
500 MeV/n 48Ti particles was also found to signiﬁcantly re-
duce exploration for the novel object (DI = 23.74 – 12.8,
p < 0.05 at 5 cGy; DI = 16.4 – 6.6, p < 0.05 at 30 cGy).
1416
TSENG ET AL.

variability and a tendency to plateau. The dose dependency of
radiation-induced oxidative stress suggested cause and effect,
but also suggested the existence of nontargeted effects. As
alluded to above, many of these studies were performed to
determine whether doses corresponding to less than one
particle traversal/cell led to any signiﬁcant changes in oxi-
dative stress. Doses delivered over the range of 1–15 cGy (Fig.
2) correspond to 0.041–0.59 average hits/cell (where ‘‘hit’’
indicates traversal of any part of the geometric cross section of
the cell), based on an average cellular radius of 6 lm. At these
low doses, from 4% to 45% of the cells incur hits after 1 and 15
cGy respectively. Given the paucity of cells traversed at the
lowest doses and ion ﬂuences used in these studies, data
suggested that direct particle traversals was not a prerequisite
for charged particle-induced oxidative stress.
Neurospheres irradiated with very low particle ﬂuences
were analyzed for changes in reactive species over the fol-
lowing 2 days (Figs. 3 and 4). Depending on time and reactive
species, as few as 500 ions/cm2 were found to elicit increased
oxidative stress. At this low ion ﬂuence, as few as 1/1770 cells
or 1/50 neurospheres were hit (based on an average neuro-
sphere radius of 37 lm at the time of irradiation) by the inci-
dent Fe ions. Increasing the ﬂuence of incident ions was in
general found to elicit a progressive increase in the levels of
ROS/RNS. When ﬂuences were adjusted to hit every neuro-
sphere once, on average, or 1/30 cells (i.e., 30,000 ions/cm2),
oxidative stress was usually at a relative maximum within
2 days of exposure (Figs. 3 and 4). Despite the postirradiation
variations in temporal response for oxidative stress in cells
subjected to low dose exposures, overall trends were
observed for increased charged particle-induced oxidative
stress.
The quality and quantity of damage types to various target
molecules in cells subjected to the high ionization densities
near the center of a track (track core) will differ from those in
cells more distal to the track where secondary electrons (delta
rays) produce more dispersed patterns of ionization. While
ionization patterns are stochastic, on average the ionization
density varies continuously as a function of 1/radial dis-
tance2 from the track center (10, 11, 13). Thus the ‘‘core’’ is a
term of convenience. The GERM code can be used to calcu-
late this distribution (14). Cellular damage resulting from
HZE particles is known to include a high multiplicity of
damaged sites within submicron volumes that impedes the
repair and recovery of the exposed cells (26). However, su-
perimposed on the population of cells directly traversed by
high LET particles are larger populations of cells that re-
ceived exposure only from the lower LET delta rays at dis-
tances greater than a few tens of nanometers. The damage
sustained by the latter cells will be of lower multiplicity and
will be more effectively managed by cellular damage detec-
tion and repair systems.
From the GERM code we may estimate that all sites within a
cylindrical volume of radius 1.4 lm will receive at least 10 cGy
local dose, all sites within a 4.5lm radius cylindrical volume
will receive at least 1 cGy, and all sites within 14 lm will re-
ceive at least 0.1 cGy for 600 MeV/n 56Fe. Given a neuro-
sphere of 74 lm in diameter containing about 235 cells, a
particle traversing the full diameter will ‘‘hit’’ about six or
seven cells. However, on the order of 20 cells will receive ex-
posures above 1 cGy, representing about 1/2 of their volumes.
An intermediate number of cells will experience doses > 10
cGy over parts of their volumes. However, for exposures
above 0.1 cGy almost 1/4th of the cells in the neurosphere will
be involved. It is also worth noting that particles simply
passing within *10 lm of a neurosphere may impart low LET
exposures ( > 0.1 cGy) to neighboring cells, effectively in-
creasing the proportion of ‘‘hit’’ spheres at low ﬂuences.
Low LET radiation doses of 1–10 cGy have been shown to
be effective as priming doses in adaptive effect investigations
and therefore can modulate cell damage detection and repair
properties. This may be in part due to changes in mitochon-
drial function (cytoplasm) and not just to cell nuclear damage
(7). Even lower doses of gamma rays (*0.1 cGy) can modify
the frequency of neoplastic transformation in mouse embryo
ﬁbroblasts (3). Thus, delta-ray exposures associated with
tracks must be considered signiﬁcant contributors to overall
responses of neurosphere cell populations, and may account
for some of the resistance observed in irradiated neurospheres
at higher doses (Fig. 1). Given the cellular growth geometries
of neurospheres and the geometry of tracks, it is highly likely
that the oxidative stress response observed under limiting
particle ﬂuences can in part be attributed to delta ray expo-
sures many microns away from the track center. Reactive
species, emanating from cells hit by cores or peripheries of
tracks may then go on to mediate further nontargeted effects.
While not the focus of this study, signiﬁcant published data
show that radiation-induced oxidative stress serves as a bio-
chemical mechanism regulating certain nontargeted effects
(18, 22, 33, 49).
While low dose acute effects may have an adverse impact
on mission-speciﬁc tasks, performance decrements are not the
only potential risks associated with CNS exposure to the
space radiation environment. Additional studies were con-
ducted to ascertain the long-term changes to redox state as-
sociated with low dose exposure to HZE particles. Cells
analyzed over 1–8 weeks following exposure to Fe ions at
BNL were found to show increased levels of ROS/RNS at
most times (Fig. 5). Given the protracted nature of these
measurements, and the inherent differences between indi-
vidual accelerator campaigns conducted over several years,
the wide experimental variability is not altogether unex-
pected. Rather than over interpret the subtle to more robust
ﬂuctuations in the levels of the reactive species measured, it
seems more appropriate to comment on the overall trends
found. Clearly, over the 2-month postirradiation interval an-
alyzed changes in oxidative stress occurred. The levels of
ROS/RNS, superoxide, and NO levels were elevated com-
pared with sham-irradiated controls analyzed in parallel, and
increased oxidative stress was not found to be below back-
ground levels postirradiation. While the dose dependency of
these effects did not reach signiﬁcance the alterations to the
redox state of cells never appeared to stabilize or fall below
basal levels. Over the range of applied doses, acute exposure
to iron ions led to a perturbation of oxidative stress that did
not abate. The data suggest that as a general trend, exposure
to charged particles elicits essentially permanent changes to
the redox state of surviving cells.
Fluorogenic dyes provide convenient readouts for the
overall redox state of cells subjected to irradiation, but their
usage is associated with several limitations that have recently
been reviewed (28). The oxidation of CM-H2DCFDA is sus-
ceptible to peroxidase activity, iron signaling, redox cycling,
and one-electron oxidation by the hydroxyl radical ($OH),
HEAVY ION-INDUCED OXIDATIVE STRESS IN NEURAL STEM CELLS
1417

peroxynitrite (ONOO -) and other reactive intermediates (28).
The red ﬂuorescence derived from Mitosox may not entirely
be due to mitochondrially-derived superoxide, as other oxi-
dants ($OH, ONOO -) can generate alternative species with
overlapping ﬂuorescent spectra (28). Similarly, DAF reacts
with NO and other NO oxidation products to yield ﬂuores-
cent adducts (40). Thus, while the complexity of the intra-
cellular redox chemistry precludes direct assignment of
ﬂuorescent signals derived from oxidized dyes to speciﬁc
reactive species or their sites of production, our data does
suggest that irradiation elicits an overall imbalance in redox
homeostasis that promotes a persistent oxidative stress in ir-
radiated cells. Past work has shown that irradiation disrupts
mitochondrial function through alterations in the permeabil-
ity transition and electron transport thereby increasing release
of ROS/RNS (30). Related work from us and others has
identiﬁed defects in mitochondrial complex II, and possibly
mutations in succinate dehydrogenase subunit D that are
likely to contribute to the elevation in reactive species after
irradiation (17, 39). Thus, radiation-induced alterations in
mitochondrial function are likely to be responsible for a sig-
niﬁcant fraction of the persistent oxidative stress observed in
these studies.
The issue of whether radiation-induced levels of oxidative
stress are good or bad in the context CNS functionality is more
difﬁcult to ascertain. Increased levels of proxidants found
after irradiation may not translate to oxidative injury, a limi-
tation that complicates the assessment of physiological rele-
vance. Further, low dose ( < 1 Gy) radiation effects are known
to differ from those occurring after higher doses, where low
dose stimulation of redox signaling may provide neuropro-
tective effects as opposed to higher dose inhibition of these
pathways. Interestingly, these observations ﬁt with the
emerging concepts of hormetic dose responses and how they
might engage ‘‘vitagene’’ networks to promote neuroprotec-
tion [recently reviewed in (9)]. Past work from our lab has
found that excess superoxide derived from genetic disruption
of SOD isoforms is neuroprotective after cranial irradiation
(24, 46). More recent studies from our lab using a transgenic
mouse model (MCAT) that overexpresses human catalase
targeted to the mitochondria provide further support for the
importance of redox balance in the CNS (31). Low dose
(proton) stimulation of endogenous neural precursor cell
proliferation was attenuated in MCAT mice, while promoting
neurogenesis after low (0.5 Gy) but not high dose (2 Gy).
Related ﬁndings from our group have shown protective
radioadaptation in cultured neural stem and precursor cells
after low but not high dose exposure to protons and c-rays
(50). Improved survival after low dose exposure could be
eliminated by the antioxidant N-acetyl-cysteine, providing
further evidence for the importance of redox homeostasis in
irradiated cells. Thus, evidence suggests that low dose expo-
sure and/or physiologic levels of reactive species may pro-
mote neuroprotection, at least at the cellular level. It is more
difﬁcult to predict how such changes might impact a multi-
faceted endpoint such as cognition, but redox imbalance may
well alter the long-term functionality of the brain.
Application of similar dye based approaches to detect
transient reactive species in vivo are more complicated, and
prompted our analyses of antioxidant levels and enzyme ac-
tivities in mice subjected to low dose irradiation. The ratio of
oxidized to reduced glutathione was reduced signiﬁcantly at
both doses 2 weeks after irradiation, which was consistent
with the signiﬁcant increase in activity of all antioxidant en-
zymes measured at that time (i.e., catalase, total SOD, GPx,
and GST) (Fig. 6). Elevated enzymatic activities were found to
return to background levels 1 month after irradiation, a time
in which the level of GSSG:GSG trended upward to a more
oxidized state (Fig. 6). The dynamic response of brain anti-
oxidants to acute exposure suggest a compensatory response
to elevated oxidative stress over 2 weeks, which is then at-
tenuated over longer times. While the precise mechanism/s
underlying these antioxidant responses is uncertain, it sug-
gests again that changes in redox metabolism could alter ox-
idative stress levels to impact the functionality of the
irradiated CNS.
In addition to radiation-induced oxidative stress, heavy ion
exposure has been linked to neuroinﬂammation and altered
hippocampal neurogenesis in mice exposed 2–9 months be-
fore (43–45). Alterations to neurogenesis may explain certain
observations in earlier (47, 48) and more recent (27) reports of
reduced spatial learning in rats exposed to 1 GeV/n iron ions.
Other mechanisms involving impaired glutamatergic trans-
mission (37), altered autophagy (42) and synaptic protein al-
terations (19) are likely to contribute to functional decrements
in cognition. Neurocognitive tasks dependent on other non-
hippocampal areas of the brain are also altered after heavy ion
exposure (4, 5, 34), as exposure to low doses of iron ions was
found to impair the ability of rats to conduct attentional set-
shifting, suggesting deﬁcits in executive function (34). While
the link between radiation-induced oxidative stress and im-
paired executive function is uncertain, the antioxidant a-lipoic
acid was found to prevent certain spatial memory impair-
ments caused by heavy ion exposures (51). While it remains
uncertain how the persistent changes in redox state observed
following charged particle exposure might impact perfor-
mance decrements during spaceﬂight or long-term cognitive
health, the impairments in NOR (Fig. 7) seen after low dose
56Fe irradiation support the functional signiﬁcance of these
low dose radiation effects.
The deﬁcits observed after 56Fe irradiation on the NOR task
did not translate to functional decrements when animals were
assessed in the water maze test. Reasons for this are uncertain,
but may indicate that neurocognitive sequelae had insufﬁ-
cient time to fully develop over this relatively brief postirra-
diation (i.e., 2 weeks) interval. The fact that radiation-induced
cognitive impairment develops over months to years in pa-
tients receiving much higher total doses during clinical ra-
diotherapy supports this idea (8, 38). Further, the MWM
interrogates different regions of the brain than does the NOR
task (4, 5), and NOR performance may in fact provide a more
sensitive indicator of nonhippocampal (perirhinal and pre-
frontal cortex) dependent deﬁcits caused by irradiation.
The foregoing possibilities prompted further investigations
into the impact of heavy ion irradiation, where animals ex-
posed to low doses (5 or 30 cGy) of 600 MeV/n 16O or 500
MeV/n 48Ti particles were analyzed 12 weeks later for deﬁcits
in NOR. These data show that NOR was impaired signiﬁ-
cantly at these protracted postirradiation times, where the
tendency to explore novelty was reduced on average by 67%
for all cohorts compared to sham-irradiated controls (Fig. 8).
Given these low doses and protracted times of analyses, these
ﬁndings are noteworthy, and suggest that exposure to space
relevant ﬂuences of charged particles is associated with a risk
1418
TSENG ET AL.

for developing certain performance decrements. Since ani-
mals explore objects equally during familiarization and ex-
hibit no signs of neophobia, deﬁcits in NOR are likely due to
impaired learning and/or memory rather than reduced curi-
osity. Whether or not the chronic trends of elevated oxidative
stress found after such exposures are causal and/or contrib-
utory to the observed neurocognitive sequelae remain to be
elucidated. Nonetheless, our ﬁndings demonstrate a tempo-
ral coincidence between radiation-induced oxidative stress
and cognitive dysfunction, and suggest a link between altered
redox metabolism in the CNS and functional behavioral
outcome.
Materials and Methods
Cell culture
Primary neural stem/precursor cells isolated from the
mouse subventricular and hippocampal dentate subgranular
zones were used for all studies. These cells were grown in
DME/F12 (1:1; Invitrogen), supplemented with bovine serum
albumin (0.4%; Sigma), insulin (20 lg/ml; Sigma), progester-
one (1.59 nM; Sigma), putrescine (7.7 lg/ml; Sigma), sodium
selenite (24 nM; Sigma), apo-transferrin (80 lg/ml; Sigma),
heparin (0.76 units/ml; Sigma), epidermal growth factor
(200 ng/ml; Biomedical Technologies), and ﬁbroblast growth
factor (40 ng/ml; Peprotech). Cultures are passaged three
times weekly by mechanical trituration and maintained in T25
ﬂasks kept on an orbital shaker at slow rotation (*50 rpm) in
a CO2 (5%) incubator at 37C and maximum humidity. Over
the course of these experiments, cultures were maintained
between passages 10–15 before irradiation and then passaged
as described until the time of analysis. Under these conditions,
cells routinely exhibit doubling times of 20–22 h.
Animals
Mice (C57BL/6J background) were used and all animal
procedures were carried out in accordance with NIH and
IACUC guidelines. For antioxidant measurements, 2-month-
old male C57BL/6J wild-type mice (n = 30) were used di-
vided as 0 Gy (n = 6), 0.5 Gy (n = 4), and 2 Gy (n = 4), with
irradiated groups analyzed 2 and 4 weeks following irradi-
ation. For cognitive studies, 2-month-old male C57BL/6J
wild-type mice (n = 16) were irradiated with 600 MeV/n iron
ions and subjected to NOR or the MWM 2 weeks after ex-
posure. For the assessment of NOR 12 weeks after exposure,
animals were irradiated with 600 MeV/n oxygen or titanium
ions at BNL.
Irradiation
Iron ion (600 MeV/n; LET 180 keV/lm) irradiations were
performed at the NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL)
at BNL. For the majority of irradiations ( ‡ 1 cGy), dose rates
between 5 and 50 cGy/min were used, where spatial beam
uniformity was conﬁrmed with a digital beam imager and
beam dosimetry was measured with an ion chamber. Fur-
ther details of this beam have been described (36). At lower
ion ﬂuences (500–30,000 ions/cm2), dosimetry was done by
means of a count-based cutoff, in which a scintillation
counter was used to give a signal for each ion track through
it. Signals from the primary ion are well separated, larger
and far more numerous than those derived from fragments.
A pulse-height discriminator is used to ensure that only the
primary ions are counted by the scaler, which in turn cuts
the beam off when the desired number of counts is reached.
Since fragments represent roughly 2% of the total ﬂuence,
this method provides a straightforward method for quanti-
fying dose. Dose can be easily converted to number of ions/
cm2; for example, 0.1 cGy of Fe at 600 MeV/n is delivered by
3.6 · 103 ions/cm2. The counter is 1 cm2 and can accept up to
about 105 counts/spill, while the beam can be reduced to 102
ions/cm2 per spill, thereby providing a useful method for
measuring dose over the low ion ﬂuences used in this study.
The NSRL physics staff performed all dosimetry and further
details regarding similar dosimetry setups have been pub-
lished (53).
For all 600 MeV/n 56Fe ion exposures neurospheres were
split the day before irradiation. Spheres re-form during this
preirradiation interval, approaching diameters of 74 – 5 lm
containing 234 – 65 cells. For irradiation, cells were gently
loaded into 15 ml centrifuge tubes and placed in the beamline
horizontally using a low-density polystyrene holder to mini-
mize any scatter from nuclear fragmentation. Tubes were
placed within a region of 95% beam uniformity and oriented
such that the beam entered from the side of the tube. Calcu-
lations using NASA’s GERM code indicate that fragmentation
of iron ions passing through the maximum depth results in
11% of the ﬂuence from fragments (mostly protons and al-
phas). Despite the fragmentation, the overwhelming contri-
bution to dose is from primary iron particles. Following
irradiation, cells were seeded into ﬂasks or multiwell plates
for the analysis of survival and oxidative stress. Culture
conditions were carefully optimized to maintain all cells in
log-phase growth over each of the postirradiation times and
to normalize the initial distribution of cells between ﬂasks for
each of the experimental conditions.
For in vivo antioxidant measurements, mice were subjected
to whole body c-irradiation (0.1 or 1.0 Gy) using a 137Cs ir-
radiator at a dose rate of 2.07 Gy/min. For the in vivo cognitive
experiments, mice were shipped to BNL. After a 1-week ac-
climation period, the mice were either sham-irradiated or
whole body irradiated with 600 MeV/n 56Fe particles at a
dose of 0.1 Gy or irradiated with 600 MeV/n 16O or 500 MeV/
n 48Ti particles at a dose of 5 or 30 cGy. For 56Fe irradiations,
cognitive testing began 1 week after the mice arrived at OHSU
(i.e., 2 weeks postexposure) and for 16O or 48Ti irradiations,
cognitive testing was conducted at UCI, 12 weeks after
exposure.
Cell survival and neurosphere assays
Irradiated cultures were analyzed for cell numbers and
sphere forming capacity to ascertain the impact of charged
particle irradiation on stem and precursor cells. Following
irradiation neurosphere cultures were either seeded into
ﬂasks for the quantiﬁcation of cell number or into 96-well
plates for the determination of sphere forming capacity. Bulk
neurosphere cultures were dissociated 5 days following ex-
posure and counted by hemocytometer. Alternatively, irra-
diated cultures were dissociated the day of irradiation,
diluted into 96-well plates and analyzed by eye for the pres-
ence of spheres. The number of spheres counted 5 days fol-
lowing exposure was equated to surviving fraction, adjusted
by the number of cells seeded per well.
HEAVY ION-INDUCED OXIDATIVE STRESS IN NEURAL STEM CELLS
1419

Fluorescent activated cell sorting analysis
of redox-sensitive dyes
Fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS) was used to
quantify the levels of reactive species in cells subjected to
charged particle irradiation. After irradiation and on the day
of assay, cells were aliquoted into 24-well plates. Multiple
wells were used for the various dyes, doses, and post-
irradiation times analyzed. The ROS/RNS-sensitive dye
5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2¢,7¢-dichlorodihydroﬂuorescein dia-
cetate (CM-H2DCFDA, 5 lM; Invitrogen), the NO-sensitive
dye DAF (5 lM; Invitrogen), or the superoxide-sensitive dye
MitoSOX (0.5 lM; Invitrogen) was added 1 h prior to analysis
by FACS. Approximately 10 min prior to FACS analysis,
neurospheres were mechanically dissociated by trituration
into single cell suspensions subjected to FACS analysis.
Details regarding antioxidant measurements and cognitive
testing can be found online in Supplementary Data (Supple-
mentary Data are available online at www.liebertpub.com/
ars).
Statistical analysis
Data is expressed as the mean – S.E.M. of three to four in-
dependent measurements and the level of signiﬁcance was
assessed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA, one way)
with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison and Student’s t-tests
employing Prism data analysis software (v3.0). For the cog-
nitive test, (ANOVA, one-way) was used to assess group
differences in exploratory times, with irradiation as between
subject factor. To analyze preference for the novel object,
Student t-tests were used. Statistical signiﬁcance was assigned
at a p £ 0.05.
Acknowledgments
We kindly thank and appreciate the efforts of the BNL
physicists Adam Rusek and Michael Sivertz who provided
the critical technical help for ensuring accurate dosimetry and
beam delivery. We also appreciate the assistance of Michael
McCormick and Douglas Spitz in running the antioxidant
assays at the Radiation and Free Radical Research Core La-
boratory at the University of Iowa.
This work was supported by NASA Grants NNA06CB39G
(C.L.L.), NX09AK25G (C.L.L.), NNX10AD59G (G.A.N., J.R.,
C.L.L.), and NNJ12ZSA001N (J.R.).
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
References
1. Acharya MM, Lan ML, Kan VH, Patel NH, Giedzinski E,
et al. Consequences of ionizing radiation-induced damage in
human neural stem cells. Free Radic Biol Med 49: 1846–1855,
2010.
2. Azari H, Louis SA, Shariﬁfar S, Vedam-Mai V, and Reynolds
BA. Neural-colony forming cell assay: an assay to discrimi-
nate bona ﬁde neural stem cells from neural progenitor cells.
J Vis Exp pii: 2639, 2011.
3. Azzam EI, de Toledo SM, Raaphorst GP, and Mitchel RE.
Low-dose ionizing radiation decreases the frequency of
neoplastic transformation to a level below the spontaneous
rate in C3H 10T1/2 cells. Radiat Res 146: 369–373, 1996.
4. Barker GR, Bird F, Alexander V, and Warburton EC. Re-
cognition memory for objects, place, and temporal order: a
disconnection analysis of the role of the medial prefrontal
cortex and perirhinal cortex. J Neurosci 27: 2948–2957,
2007.
5. Barker GR and Warburton EC. When is the hippocampus
involved in recognition memory? J Neurosci 31: 10721–10731,
2011.
6. Brown J, Cooper-Kuhn CM, Kempermann G, Van Praag H,
Winkler J, et al. Enriched environment and physical activity
stimulate hippocampal but not olfactory bulb neurogenesis.
Eur J Neurosci 17: 2042–2046, 2003.
7. Buonanno M, de Toledo SM, Pain D, and Azzam EI. Long-
term consequences of radiation-induced bystander effects
depend on radiation quality and dose and correlate with
oxidative stress. Radiat Res 175: 405–415, 2011.
8. Butler JM, Rapp SR, and Shaw EG. Managing the cognitive
effects of brain tumor radiation therapy. Curr Treat Options
Oncol 7: 517–523, 2006.
9. Calabrese C, Poppleton H, Kocak M, Hogg TL, Fuller C, et al.
A perivascular niche for brain tumor stem cells. Cancer Cell
11: 69–82, 2007.
10. Chatterjee A and Holley WR. Computer simulation of initial
events in the biochemical mechanisms of DNA damage. Adv
Radiat Biol 17: 181–226, 1993.
11. Chatterjee A and Schaefer HJ. Microdosimetric structure of
heavy ion tracks in tissue. Radiat Environ Biophys 13: 215–
227, 1976.
12. Chen MF, Lin CT, Chen WC, Yang CT, Chen CC, et al. The
sensitivity of human mesenchymal stem cells to ionizing
radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 66: 244–253, 2006.
13. Cucinotta FA, Katz R, Wilson JW, and Dubey RR. Heavy ion
track-structure calculations for radial dose in arbitrary ma-
terials. NASA Tech Memo 3497, 1995.
14. Cucinotta FA, Plante I, Ponomarev AL, and Kim MH. Nu-
clear interactions in heavy ion transport and event-based
risk models. Radiat Prot Dosim 143: 384–390, 2011.
15. Curtis SB and Letaw JR. Galactic cosmic rays and cell-hit
frequencies outside the magnetosphere. Adv Space Res 9:
293–298, 1989.
16. Datta K, Suman S, Kallakury BV, and Fornace AJ, Jr. Ex-
posure to heavy ion radiation induces persistent oxidative
stress in mouse intestine. PLoS One 7: e42224, 2012.
17. Dayal D, Martin SM, Owens KM, Aykin-Burns N, Zhu Y,
et al. Mitochondrial complex II dysfunction can contribute
signiﬁcantly to genomic instability after exposure to ionizing
radiation. Radiat Res 172: 737–745, 2009.
18. de Toledo SM, Asaad N, Venkatachalam P, Li L, Howell
RW, et al. Adaptive responses to low-dose/low-dose-rate
gamma rays in normal human ﬁbroblasts: the role of growth
architecture and oxidative metabolism. Radiat Res 166: 849–
857, 2006.
19. Denisova NA, Shukitt-Hale B, Rabin BM, and Joseph JA.
Brain signaling and behavioral responses induced by expo-
sure to (56)Fe-particle radiation. Radiat Res 158: 725–734,
2002.
20. Durante M and Cucinotta FA. Heavy ion carcinogenesis and
human space exploration. Nat Rev Cancer 8: 465–472, 2008.
21. Encinas JM, Vazquez ME, Switzer RC, Chamberland DW,
Nick H, et al. Quiescent adult neural stem cells are excep-
tionally sensitive to cosmic radiation. Exp Neurol 210: 274–
279, 2008.
22. Fike JR, Rola R, and Limoli CL. Radiation response of neural
precursor cells. Neurosurg Clin N Am 18: 115–127, 2007.
1420
TSENG ET AL.

23. Fike JR, Rosi S, and Limoli CL. Neural precursor cells and
central nervous system radiation sensitivity. Semin Radiat
Oncol 19: 122–132, 2009.
24. Fishman K, Baure J, Zou Y, Huang TT, Andres-Mach M,
et al. Radiation-induced reductions in neurogenesis are
ameliorated in mice deﬁcient in CuZnSOD or MnSOD. Free
Radic Biol Med 47: 1459–1467, 2009.
25. Giedzinski E, Rola R, Fike JR, and Limoli CL. Efﬁcient pro-
duction of reactive oxygen species in neural precursor cells
after exposure to 250 MeV protons. Radiat Res 164: 540–544,
2005.
26. Hada M and Sutherland BM. Spectrum of complex DNA
damages depends on the incident radiation. Radiat Res 165:
223–230, 2006.
27. Jacobs BL, van Praag H, and Gage FH. Adult brain neuro-
genesis and psychiatry: a novel theory of depression. Mol
Psychiatry 5: 262–269, 2000.
28. Kalyanaraman B, Darley-Usmar V, Davies KJ, Dennery PA,
Forman HJ, et al. Measuring reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species with ﬂuorescent probes: challenges and limitations.
Free Radic Biol Med 52: 1–6, 2012.
29. Lan ML, Acharya MM, Tran KK, Bahari-Kashani J, Patel
NH, et al. Characterizing the radioresponse of pluripotent
and multipotent human stem cells. PLoS One 7: e50048, 2012.
30. Leach JK, Van Tuyle G, Lin PS, Schmidt-Ullrich R, and
Mikkelsen RB. Ionizing radiation-induced, mitochondria-
dependent generation of reactive oxygen/nitrogen. Cancer
Res 61: 3894–3901, 2001.
31. Liao AC, Craver BM, Tseng BP, Tran KT, Parihar VK, et al.
Mitochondrial-targeted human catalase affords neuropro-
tection from proton irradiation. Radiat Res 180: 1–6, 2013.
32. Limoli CL, Giedzinski E, Baure J, Rola R, and Fike JR. Redox
changes induced in hippocampal precursor cells by heavy
ion irradiation. Radiat Environ Biophys 46: 167–172, 2007.
33. Limoli CL, Giedzinski E, Rola R, Otsuka S, Palmer TD, et al.
Radiation response of neural precursor cells: linking cellular
sensitivity to cell cycle checkpoints, apoptosis and oxidative
stress. Radiat Res 161: 17–27, 2004.
34. Lonart G, Parris B, Johnson AM, Miles S, Sanford LD, et al.
Executive function in rats is impaired by low (20 cGy) doses
of 1 GeV/u (56)Fe particles. Radiat Res 178: 289–294, 2012.
35. Louis SA, Rietze RL, Deleyrolle L, Wagey RE, Thomas TE,
et al. Enumeration of neural stem and progenitor cells in the
neural colony-forming cell assay. Stem Cells 26: 988–996,
2008.
36. Lowenstein DI and Rusek A. Technical developments at the
NASA Space Radiation Laboratory. Radiat Environ Biophys
46: 91–94, 2007.
37. Machida M, Lonart G, and Britten RA. Low (60 cGy) doses
of (56)Fe HZE-particle radiation lead to a persistent reduc-
tion in the glutamatergic readily releasable pool in rat hip-
pocampal synaptosomes. Radiat Res 174: 618–623, 2010.
38. Meyers CA. Neurocognitive dysfunction in cancer patients.
Oncology (Williston Park) 14: 75–79; discussion 79, 81–72, 85,
2000.
39. Owens KM, Aykin-Burns N, Dayal D, Coleman MC, Do-
mann FE, et al. Genomic instability induced by mutant
succinate dehydrogenase subunit D (SDHD) is mediated by
O2(-*) and H2O2. Free Radic Biol Med 52: 160–166, 2012.
40. Planchet E and Kaiser WM. Nitric oxide (NO) detection by DAF
ﬂuorescence and chemiluminescence: a comparison using abi-
otic and biotic NO sources. J Exp Bot 57: 3043–3055, 2006.
41. Plante I and Cucinotta FA. Energy deposition and relative
frequency of hits of cylindrical nanovolume in medium ir-
radiated by ions: monte carlo simulation of tracks structure.
Radiat Environ Biophys 49: 5–13, 2010.
42. Poulose SM, Bielinski DF, Carrihill-Knoll K, Rabin BM, and
Shukitt-Hale B. Exposure to 16O-particle radiation causes
aging-like decrements in rats through increased oxidative
stress, inﬂammation and loss of autophagy. Radiat Res 176:
761–769, 2011.
43. Rola R, Fishman K, Baure J, Rosi S, Lamborn KR, et al.
Hippocampal neurogenesis and neuroinﬂammation after
cranial irradiation with (56)Fe particles. Radiat Res 169: 626–
632, 2008.
44. Rola R, Otsuka S, Obenaus A, Nelson GA, Limoli CL, et al.
Indicators of hippocampal neurogenesis are altered by 56Fe-
particle irradiation in a dose-dependent manner. Radiat Res
162: 442–446, 2004.
45. Rola R, Sarkissian V, Obenaus A, Nelson GA, Otsuka S, et al.
High-LET radiation induces inﬂammation and persistent
changes in markers of hippocampal neurogenesis. Radiat Res
164: 556–560, 2005.
46. Rola R, Zou Y, Huang TT, Fishman K, Baure J, et al. Lack of
extracellular superoxide dismutase (EC-SOD) in the micro-
environment impacts radiation-induced changes in neuro-
genesis. Free Radic Biol Med 42: 1133–1145; discussion 1131–
1132, 2007.
47. Shukitt-Hale B, Casadesus G, Cantuti-Castelvetri I, Rabin
BM, and Joseph JA. Cognitive deﬁcits induced by 56Fe ra-
diation exposure. Adv Space Res 31: 119–126, 2003.
48. Shukitt-Hale B, Casadesus G, McEwen JJ, Rabin BM, and Joseph
JA. Spatiallearning and memory deﬁcits inducedby exposureto
iron-56-particle radiation. Radiat Res 154: 28–33, 20.
49. Spitz DR, Sim JE, Ridnour LA, Galoforo SS, and Lee YJ.
Glucose deprivation-induced oxidative stress in human tu-
mor cells. A fundamental defect in metabolism? Ann N Y
Acad Sci 899: 349–362, 2000.
50. Tseng BP, Lan ML, Tran KT, Acharya MA, Giedzinski E,
et al. Characterizing low dose and dose rate effects in rodent
and human neural stem cells exposed to proton and gamma
irradiation. Redox Biol 1: 153–162, 2013.
51. Villasana LE, Rosenthal RA, Doctrow SR, Pfankuch T, Zu-
loaga DG, et al. Effects of alpha-lipoic acid on associative and
spatial memory of sham-irradiated and (56)Fe-irradiated
C57BL/6J male mice. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 103: 487–493,
2012.
52. Vlashi E, Kim K, Lagadec C, Donna LD, McDonald JT, et al.
In vivo imaging, tracking, and targeting of cancer stem cells. J
Natl Cancer Inst 101: 350–359, 2009.
53. Yang H, Magpayo N, Rusek A, Chiang IH, Sivertz M, et al.
Effects of very low ﬂuences of high-energy protons or iron
ions on irradiated and bystander cells. Radiat Res 176: 695–
705, 2011.
Address correspondence to:
Dr. Charles L. Limoli
Department of Radiation Oncology
University of California, Irvine
Medical Sciences I
Room B-146B
Irvine, CA 92697-2695
E-mail: climoli@uci.edu
Date of ﬁrst submission to ARS Central, December 4, 2012;
date of ﬁnal revised submission, June 10, 2013; date of ac-
ceptance, June 26, 2013.
HEAVY ION-INDUCED OXIDATIVE STRESS IN NEURAL STEM CELLS
1421

Abbreviations Used
ANOVA ¼ analysis of variance
CM-H2DCFDA ¼ 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2¢,7¢-
dichlorodihydroﬂuorescein diacetate
DAF ¼ 4-amino-5-methylamino-2¢,7¢-diﬂuoro-
ﬂuorescein diacetate
DI ¼ discrimination index
FACS ¼ ﬂuorescent activated cell sorting
GST ¼ glutathione-S-transferase
HZE ¼ High Z and Energy
LET ¼ linear energy transfer
MWM ¼ Morris Water Maze
NO ¼ nitric oxide
NOR ¼ novel object recognition
RNS ¼ reactive nitrogen species
ROS ¼ reactive oxygen species
1422
TSENG ET AL.
