Precision Clinical Medicine , 2024, 7 : pbae007 
DOI: 10.1093/pcmedi/pbae007 
Research Article 
Genome and clonal hematopoiesis stability contrasts 
with immune, cfDNA, mitochondrial, and telomere 
length changes during short dur a tion spaceflight 
J . Sebastian Garcia-Medina, 1 ,2 Karolina Sienkiewicz, 1 ,2 S. Anand Nar ay anan, 10 Eliah G. Ov erbey, 1 , 2 , 15 Kirill Grigor ev, 1 ,2 Krista A. Ryon, 1 
Marissa Burke, 1 Jacqueline Proszynski, 1 Braden Tierney, 1 ,2 Caleb M. Schmidt, 6 , 7 , 11 Nuria Mencia-Trinchant, 1 Remi Klotz, 4 
Veronica Ortiz, 4 Jonathan Foox, 1 ,2 Christopher Chin, 1 , 2 , 15 , 18 , 19 Deena Najjar, 1 Irina Matei, 8 ,9 Irenaeus Chan , 16 Carlos Cruchaga, 16 
Ashley Kleinman, 1 J angK eun Kim, 1 ,2 Alexander Lucaci, 1 Conor Loy, 17 Omar y Mzav a, 17 Iwijn De Vlaminck, 17 Anvita Singaraju, 3 
Lynn E. Taylor, 13 Julian C. Schmidt, 6 ,7 Michael A. Schmidt, 6 ,7 K ell y Blease, 12 Juan Moreno, 12 Andrew Boddicker, 12 Junhua Zhao, 12 
Bryan Lajoie, 12 Andrew Altomare, 12 Sem y on Krugly ak, 12 Shawn Levy, 12 Min Yu, 4 Duane C. Hassane, 1 Susan M. Bailey, 13 ,14 
K ell y Bolton, 16 Jaime Mateus, 5 Christopher E. Mason 1 , 2 , 15 , 18 , 19 , * 
1 Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell Univ ersity, Ne w York, NY 10021, USA 
2 The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA 
3 Department of Immunology, Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell Univ ersity, Ne w York, NY 10021, USA 
4 Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regener ativ e Medicine, K ec k Sc hool of Medicine, Univ ersity of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA 
5 Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, Ha wthorne , C A 90250, USA 
6 Sov aris Aer ospace, Boulder, CO 80302, USA 
7 Adv anced P attern Anal ysis & Human Performance Gr oup, Boulder, CO 80302, USA 
8 Children’s Cancer and Blood Foundation Laboratories, Departments of Pediatrics and Cell and Developmental Biology, Drukier Institute for Children’s Health, 
Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA 
9 Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA 
10 Department of Nutrition and Integr ativ e Physiology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA 
11 Department of Systems Engineering, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA 
12 Element Biosciences, San Diego, CA 10055, USA 
13 Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA 
14 Cell and Molecular Biology Pr ogr am, Color ado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA 
15 BioAstr a Inc, Ne w York, NY, USA 
16 Washington University St. Louis Oncology Division, St. Louis, MO 63100, USA 
17 Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 
18 T he F eil Famil y Br ain and Mind Researc h Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, NY 10021, USA 
19 WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA 
∗Corresponding Author: Christopher E. Mason, E-mail: chm2042@med.cornell.edu 
Abstract 
Bac kground: The Inspir ation4 ( I4 ) mission, the first all-civilian orbital flight mission, in vestigated the ph ysiological effects of short- 
duration spaceflight through a multi-omic approac h. Despite ad vances, there remains muc h to learn about human adaptation to 
spaceflight’s unique challenges, including micr ogravity, imm une system perturbations, and radiation exposure. 
Methods: To provide a detailed genetics analysis of the mission, we collected dried blood spots pre-, during, and post-flight for DNA 
extraction. Telomere length was measured by quantitative PCR, while whole genome and cfDNA sequencing provided insight into 
genomic stability and immune adaptations. A robust bioinformatic pipeline was used for data analysis, including variant calling to 
assess mutational burden. 
Result: Telomere elongation occurred during spaceflight and shortened after return to Earth. Cell-free DNA analysis revealed in- 
cr eased imm une cell signatur es post-flight. No significant clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential ( CHIP ) or whole-genome 
insta bility w as observ ed. The long-term gene expr ession changes acr oss imm une cells suggested cellular adaptations to the space 
environment persisting months post-flight. 
Conclusion: Our findings provide valuable insights into the physiological consequences of short-duration spaceflight, with telomere 
dynamics and immune cell gene expression adapting to spaceflight and persisting after return to Earth. CHIP sequencing data will 
serve as a reference point for studying the early development of CHIP in astronauts, an understudied phenomenon as previous studies 
have focused on career astronauts. This study will serve as a reference point for future commercial and non-commercial spaceflight, 
low Earth orbit ( LEO ) missions, and deep-space exploration. 
Keywords: genomes; clonal; hematopoiesis; stability; immune; mitochondria; ribosomes; spaceflight 
Recei v ed 29 J an uar y 2024; acce pted 24 Mar c h 2024. published 8 April 2024 
© The Author ( s ) 2024. Published by Oxford Uni v ersity Pr ess on behalf of the W est China School of Medicine & W est China Hospital of Sichuan Uni v ersity. This 
is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Cr eati v e Commons Attribution License ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) , which 
permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 

2 | Garcia-Medina et al. 
Introduction 
Human spaceflight frequency has increased over the last decade, 
and with it, our grasp of its effects on human physiology. De- 
spite this, there is much to learn about how humans adapt to 
the unique challenges of the space en vironment. T he space en- 
vironment includes unique stressors, such as microgravity ( e.g. 
weightlessness ) , immune system perturbations, and space radia- 
tion exposure. Determining the effects of spaceflight on the hu- 
man genome is imper ativ e to support long-term human pres- 
ence in space. Additionally, a host of physiological adaptations oc- 
cur when humans tr av el into space, r anging fr om cardiov ascular 
and musculoskeletal deconditioning, vision changes ( e.g. space- 
flight associated neuro ocular syndrome ) , immune suppression, 
and metabolic changes, among others [ 1 ]. Mor eov er, incr easing e v- 
idence highlights the systemic immune dysregulation crewmem- 
bers experience from spaceflight exposure. Indeed, there ap- 
pears to be a reduction in T cell fr equency, suppr essed cyto- 
toxic function, as well as fluctuations in cytokine concentrations, 
with incr eased expr ession of TNF- α, interleukin-8, interleukin- 
1r a, thr ombopoietin, VEGF, and v arious c hemokines ( CCL2, CCL4, 
CXCL5, etc. ) associated with spaceflight [ 2 ]. 
To date, almost all space missions have been led by profes- 
sional astr onauts fr om gov ernment space pr ogr ams. Mor e r e- 
cently, ho w ever, SpaceX launched a crew of four civilian astro- 
nauts on the Inspiration4 ( I4 ) mission, marking a new era for 
human space exploration. The present I4 mission study aims to 
investigate the impact of short-duration spaceflight on civilians, 
along with the post-flight and long-term biomedical, immuno- 
logic, and genetic alterations resulting from spaceflight. This in- 
cludes r a pid telomeric r esponses, wher eby telomer e elongation 
occurs as a function of spaceflight, follo w ed b y shortening upon 
return to Earth [ 3 ]. Both unusually short and long telomeres have 
been associated with adverse health effects involving aging and 
a ge-r elated pathologies, suc h as cardiov ascular disease and can- 
cer. Furthermor e, a v ariety of lifestyle factors and envir onmental 
exposures influence telomere length. Previous studies have also 
shown changes in clonal hematopoiesis, where a small number of 
hematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) gain a clonal adv anta ge thr ough 
the acquisition of somatic mutations. Clonal hematopoiesis is as- 
sociated with cardiovascular disease, the de v elopment of acute 
m yeloid leuk emia ( AML ) , and incr eased ov er all mortality [ 4 , 5 ]. 
The NASA Twins Study shed light on telomeric responses and the 
c hr onic inflammatory state resulting from long-duration space- 
flight and provided the first measures of telomere length and 
clonal hematopoiesis in astronauts [ 3 , 6 ]. Mutations in epigenetic 
r egulators, suc h as DNMT3A and TET2, were found at increased 
rates in both career astronaut twins when compared to their civil- 
ian counter parts. A r etr ospectiv e study of 14 astronauts who flew 
shuttle missions has also shown an ele v ated pr esence of genetic 
abnormalities in CHIP-driver genes in the astronaut population [ 3 , 
5 , 7 ]. 
Here we investigated immune adaptations, telomere length 
dynamics, cell-fr ee DNA r elease, genomic stability, single-cell 
tr anscriptomic anal ysis, and bioc hemical ada ptations of the I4 
cr e wmembers tr av eling into lo w er earth orbit over the course of 
3 da ys , to determine the effects of short-duration spaceflight. It is 
imper ativ e to study these adaptations in this context for future 
space missions, as prolonged space envir onment exposur e could 
exponentiall y incr ease the r ate of m utational burden [ 8 ], be it due 
to the inflammatory milieu r esulting fr om spaceflight or the par- 
ticular challenges of the space environment, such as micrograv- 
ity and radiation exposure . Here , we leveraged the I4 mission to 
examine the de v elopment of genetic abnormalities in the astro- 
nauts by studying their physiological response to the demands of 
spaceflight and quantifying the genetic changes that are associ- 
ated with spaceflight. 
Methods 
Informed consent and ethics 
This study was completed following a ppr opriate ethical guide- 
lines according to the Declaration of Helsinki, ICHGCP, and lo- 
cal regulations, as applicable, from each potential subject or each 
subject’s legally authorized re presentati ve prior to participating 
in the r esearc h study. The pr otocol, the ICF, other written mate- 
rial given to the patients, and any other r ele v ant study documen- 
tation were submitted to and a ppr ov ed by the a ppr opriate ethics 
committee . T his study was conducted under a protocol reviewed 
and a ppr ov ed by the a pplicable ethics committees and investi- 
gations were undertaken by scientifically and medically qualified 
persons, where the benefits of the study were in proportion to the 
risks. All subjects were consented at an informed consent briefing 
( ICB ) at SpaceX ( Ha wthorne , C A ) , and samples were collected and 
processed under the approval of the Institutional Re vie w Board 
( IRB ) at Weill Cornell Medicine, under Protocol 21–05023569. All 
cr e w members provided written informed consent for data and 
sample sharing. 
I4 launc hed fr om K ennedy Space Center’s Launc h Complex 39A 
and tr av eled into Low-Earth Orbit acr oss a thr ee-day mission, 
r eac hing an orbital altitude of a ppr oximatel y 364 miles and ul- 
timately splashed down into the Atlantic Ocean. 
Dried blood spot ( DBS ) pre-flight, in-flight, and 
post-flight sampling 
Cr e w members warmed and massaged their fingertips to maxi- 
mize blood flow. Fingertips were sterilized ( BZK antiseptic tow- 
elette, Dynarex, Reorder No. 1303 ) and punctured using a contact- 
activated lancet ( BD Biosciences, #366 593 ) or a 21-gauge needle 
( BD Biosciences, #305 167 ) . Whatman 903 Protein Saver DBS cards 
( Cytiv a, #10 534 612 ) wer e used to ca ptur e, tr ansfer, and then store 
capillary blood with a desiccant pack ( Cytiva, #10 548 239 ) at am- 
bient temper atur e. 
DN A extr action for qPCR-based assessment of 
telomere length 
Three 3 mm circular punches were cut from the Whatman 903 
Pr otein Sav er Cards ( cat# WHA10534612 ) containing blood sam- 
ples using an Integra Miltex Standard Biopsy Punch ( cat# 12-460- 
406 ) and placed into a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube with sterile 
tw eezers. Samples w er e pr epar ed using the Qia gen QIAamp DNA 
Investigator Kit ( cat# 56 504 ) following the manufacturer’s isola- 
tion of total DNA from FTA and Guthrie Cards protocol. The quan- 
tification of DNA in each sample was determined through flu- 
orometric quantification with the Qubit 4 Fluorometer ( Thermo 
Fisher Scientific, cat# Q33238 ) and the 1X dsDNA HS Assay Kit 
( cat# Q33231 ) . DN A samples w er e sent to Color ado State Univ er- 
sity for multiplex qPCR analysis. 
Multiplex quantitati v e PCR telomere length 
measurement 
MMqPCR measurements of telomere length were carried out 
by preparing 22 μL of master mix using SYBR green Go- 
Taq qPCR master mix ( Promega #A6001 ) combined with 

Genomic and cellular changes from spaceflight | 3 
the telomere forw ar d primer ( TelG; 5 ′ -A CA CTAA GGTTTGGG 
TTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTAGTGT-3 ′ ) , telomer e r e v erse primer 
( T elC; 
5 ′ -TGTT AGGT A TCCCT A TCCCT A TCCCT A TCCCT A TCC 
CT AACA-3 ′ ) , albumin forw ar d primer ( AlbU; 5 ′ -CGGC 
GGCGGGCGGCGCGGGCTGGGCGGA AATGCTGC AC AGAATCCTTG- 
3 ′ ) , 
albumin 
r e v erse 
primer 
( AlbD; 
5 ′ -GCCCGGCCCGC 
CG 4 CGCCCGTCCCGCCGGAAAAGCATGGTCGCCTGTT-3 ′ ) at 10 
μM per primer ( Integr ated DNA Tec hnologies ) , and RNase/DNase 
free water. Then 3 μL of DNA at 3.33 ng/uL was added for a 
final volume of 25 μL, final TelG/C primers concentration of 900 
nM, and the AlbU/D primers at 400 nM. A Bio-Rad CFX-96 qPCR 
machine was used to measure telomere length. The cycle design 
w as as follo ws: 95 ◦C for 3 min; 94 ◦C for 15 s, 49 ◦C for 15 s, for 2 
cycles; 94 ◦C for 15 s, 62 ◦C for 10 s, 74 ◦C for 15 s, 84 ◦C for 10 s, and 
88 ◦C for 15 s, for 32 cycles. The melting curve was established by 
a 72 ◦C to 95 ◦C ramp at 0.5 ◦C/second increase with a 30 second 
hold. Standard curves were prepared using human genomic DNA 
( Promega Cat # G3041 ) with 3-fold dilutions ranging from 50 
ng to 0.617 ng in 3 μL per dilution. Negativ e contr ols included 
a no-template TelG/C only and AlbU/D only, and a combined 
TelG/C and AlbU/D contr ol. Samples wer e normalized across 
plates using a human genomic DN A standar d. Each sample was 
run in triplicate on a 96-well plate format and r elativ e telomer e 
length was established using a telomere ( T ) to albumin ( A ) ratio. 
Whole genome extraction and sequencing 
Genomic DN A w as obtained from the cell pellet of a cell-free 
DNA blood collection tube ( Str ec k, cat# 230470 ) using the QI- 
Aamp Blood Maxi Kit ( Qiagen, cat# 51192 ) , and then shipped to 
Element Biosciences for library preparation. The extracted DNA 
was quantified using Thermo Fisher Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit 
( cat# Q238253 ) and 8 samples wer e pr epar ed using the KAPA Hy- 
perPrep Kit and KAPA Unique-Dual Indexed Adapter Kit ( cat# 
8 861 919 702 ) . The DNA libraries were quantified using Thermo 
Fisher Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit ( cat# Q32854 ) and sized using 
Agilent High Sensitivity DNA Kit ( cat# 5067–4626 ) . 
The 8 DNA libraries generated with the KAPA HyperPrep Kit 
wer e pr ocessed using Adept Library Compatibility Kit ( Element 
Biosciences, Cat# 830–00003 ) , individually circularized with 
0.5pmol ( 30 μL of 16.67nM ) input, and quantified using the kit- 
provided qPCR standard and primer mix. The libr aries wer e pooled 
into 4 separate 2-plex pools, each denatured and sequenced on El- 
ement AVITI system ( Element Biosciences, Part #88–00 001 ) using 
2 × 150 paired end reads with indexing. Primary analysis was per- 
formed onboard the AVITI sequencing instrument. 
W hole genome/cfDN A preprocessing 
Blood and plasma samples were subjected to whole genome and 
cfDNA short read sequencing as detailed abo ve . Resultant FASTQ 
files wer e v alidated using FastQC ( v0.11.9 ) and MultiQC ( v1.13 ) . 
Read adapters were trimmed at 3 ′ and 5 ′ ends for low quality us- 
ing Trim Galore ( v0.6.5 ) , lo w er quality reads were classified and 
r emov ed, r etaining onl y those r eads with length > = 25bp, and 
ph read quality > = 20. Reads were aligned against the hg38 hu- 
man r efer ence genome with BWA MEM ( v.0.7.15 ) and subjected to 
standard QC and deduplication pr ocedur es as a part of Sentieon’s 
TNscope ( v202010 ) DN Aseq w orkflo w [ 9 ]. 
W hole genome/cfDN A/single cell v ariant calling 
Aligned and pr epr ocessed r eads wer e subjected to the TNScope 
variant calling pipeline. Calls were filtered using Fisher’s exact 
test and subsetted to SNP variants using samtools ( v1.16.1 ) , and 
filtered by triallelic sites, short tandem repeats, read quality, and 
read position bias using BCFtools ( v1.16 ) . Varient-Effect-Predictor 
VEP ( v107 ) was utilized for annotation of variants and further fil- 
tering based on predicted impact of mutations. Resulting coordi- 
nates wer e pr ocessed into allele and gene frequency matrices, and 
visualized in R using the tidyverse ( v1.3.2 ) suite of packages. 
cfDN A extr action and sequencing 
cfDN A w as isolated from 500 μL aliquots of plasma from cfDNA 
blood collection tubes ( Str ec k, #230470 ) . cfDN A w as extracted 
fr om eac h cr e w member fr om all timepoints ( 4 cr e w members, 
6 timepoints, 24 total extractions ) . cfDN A w as extracted using Qi- 
agen’s QIAamp ccf DN A/RN A Kit and eluted in 15 μL Qiagen Elu- 
tion Buffer per sample. Yield was measured for each sample using 
Thermo Fisher Qubit 1X dsDNA HS Assay ( cat# Q33231 ) . 
Entir e extr act v olume w as used as input for libr ary pr epar ation 
using NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Preparation Kit for cfDNA pro- 
tocol. Each sample w as bar coded using NEBNext Multiplex Oligos 
for Illumina ( Unique Dual Index UMI Ada ptors–96 r eactions ) . Fi- 
nal library was eluted in 30 μL and checked for concentration us- 
ing Thermo Fisher Qubit 1X dsDNA HS Assay ( cat# Q33231 ) . Fr a g- 
ment sizes were determined using Agilent’s Tapestation 2100 and 
D1000 r ea gents and Scr eenTa pe, with r esulting av er a ge fr a gment 
size ∼380 bp ( 0.25 pmol ) of each sample. 
A total of 24 cfDNA libraries generated with the NEBNext Ultra 
II DNA Libr ary Pr epar ation kit wer e pr ocessed using Adept Libr ary 
Compatibility Kit ( Element Biosciences, Cat# 830–00003 ) . Each li- 
brary w as cir cularized individually with an input range of 0.2–0.5 
pmol ( 30 μL of 6.67–16.67nM ) based on linear library yields . T he 
final circularized libraries were quantified using qPCR standard 
and primer mix and pooled into 2 separate 4-plex pools. Each 4- 
plex pool was denatured and sequenced on Element AVITI system 
( Element Biosciences, Part #88–00001 ) using 2 × 147 paired reads 
with 19 bp UMI/index 1 and 8 bp index 2. Primary analysis was 
performed onboard the AVITI sequencing instrument. 
Clonal hematopoiesis targeted variant calling 
Genomic DN A w as obtained from the cell pellet of a cell-free DNA 
blood collection tube ( Str ec k, cat# 230 470 ) using the QIAamp 
Blood Maxi Kit ( Qiagen, cat# 51 192 ) . All samples from the test- 
ing and validation cohort were sequenced using a custom de- 
signed DNA sequencing assay ( DB0188, VariantPlex, ArcherDX ) . 
This panel ca ptur es the nine genes most commonly mutated in 
solid tumor patients following ther a peutic r adiation including the 
full exonic regions of five genes ( DNMT3A, TET2, ASXL1, TP53, 
CHEK2 ) and targeted exonic regions of four genes ( JAK2, SRSF2, 
SF3B1, PPM1D ) . Libr aries wer e pr epar ed fr om 250 ng gDNA using 
the VariantPlex protocol ( ArcherDx Inc., Boulder, CO, USA ) which 
utilizes Anc hor ed Multiplex PCR ( AMP ) tec hnology to gener ate 
tar get-enric hed sequencing-r eady libr aries. Follo wing DN A fr a g- 
mentation ligation with a universal ArcherDx molecular barcode 
( MBC ) adapter is performed, which tags each DNA molecule with 
a unique molecular index ( UMI ) and allows for unidirectional am- 
plification of the sample using gene-specific primers . T he result- 
ing libraries were sequenced using a NovaSeq 6000 instrument 
( Ilumina ) , as per manufacturer’s instructions . T he methods for 
variant identification are comparable to those in Novetsky et al. 
2023 [ 10 ]. The variant calling pipeline included UMI consensus 
building follo w ed b y utilizing Mutect2, VarDictJ av a, Lofr eq2, Pin- 
del in parallel for variant identification. Normalization was per- 
formed via LeftTrimAndAlign, and a panel of normals of 27 chil- 
dren and young adults was used with a bonferr oni-corr ected p 

4 | Garcia-Medina et al. 
value to identify true putative mutations in our astronaut co- 
hort. A pileup analysis as performed in Bolton et al. 2020 [ 11 ] 
was used to query variants in longitudinal follow-ups. A variant 
list was used to scrutinize raw BAM files and the P oN samples , a 
fisher’s exact test and Bonferr oni-corr ected p v alue wer e used to 
determine a noise threshold. Variants surpassing this threshold 
in at least one sample were further examined in the remaining 
samples, and if statistically validated, the variants were aggre- 
gated to construct the final v ariant list. Variant-Effect-Pr edictor 
VEP ( v107 ) and SnpEff ( v4.3 ) was used for annotation of variants. 
Data wrangling, tidying, and visualizations were performed us- 
ing R ( v4.1.2 ) , Rstudio ( v2021.09.2 ) and libraries ( Tidyv erse, Dpl yr, 
data.table, ggplot2 ) . 
cfDN A fr agment anal ysis 
Fr a gment size distribution was calculated using the bamPEFr a g- 
mentSize tool from the deepTools Python package ( v3.5.1 ) . Lev- 
els of cfDNA ( read counts ) originating from different chromo- 
somes were normalized by c hr omosome length and total number 
of reads in the library generating a Read per Kilobase per Million 
r eads ( RPKM ) measur ement. The fr action of cell-fr ee mtDNA r el- 
ativ e to c hr omosomal cfDN A in plasma w as compared and visu- 
alized in R using the tidyverse ( v1.3.2 ) suite of packages. 
cfDNA tissue of origin deconvolution 
The enrichment of cfDNA fragments from various tissues was cal- 
culated by read coverage depletion analysis at transcription start- 
ing sites ( TSSs ) to estimate nucleosome positioning and infer gene 
expression. The pipeline is described in detail in Bezdan et al. 2020 
[ 7 ]. The resulting nucleosome periodicity was correlated with ( 1 ) 
per-tissue gene expression reference matrix retrieved from the 
Human Pr oteome Ma p ( HPM; Kim et al. 2014 [ 12 ] ) or ( 2 ) individ- 
ual astronaut pseudo-bulk expression of different cell subpopu- 
lations extr acted fr om PBMC scRNAseq dataset. In both cases the 
tissue/subpopulation-periodicity correlations were ranked by the 
value of Pearson’s correlation coefficient, clustered ( utilizing Ward 
method with Euclidean distances ) and visualized in R using the 
tidyverse ( v1.3.2 ) and ComplexHeatmap ( v2.14.0 ) packages. 
Single-cell gene expression analyses 
Longitudinal single cell data was processed in R using the Seu- 
r at pac ka ge ( v4.3.0 ) to normalize, scale and cluster cell popu- 
lations. Cell identities were determined through computational 
gating parameters of inclusion based on gene expression of 
k e y mark ers, similar to gating from Fluorescent-Activated Cell 
Sorting. CD8 + T cells were selected from the PBMC population 
by filtering CD3D + CD8A + positive cells. CD4 + T cells from 
CD3D + CD8A + cells, CD14 + monocytes from CCR2 + CD14 + cells, 
CD16 + monocytes from CD14 + CD16 + cells, NK cells from 
NCAM1 + CD3- and NCR3 + CD3- cells and DCs from CD86 + , 
CD83 + cells. 
The Seur at pac ka ge ( v4.3.0 ) was used for normalization, scal- 
ing, and differential gene expression analysis of sn-RNA data. 
Data wrangling, tidying, and visualizations were performed us- 
ing R ( v4.1.2 ) , RStudio ( v2021.09.2 ) and libraries ( Tidyv erse, Dpl yr, 
data.table, ggplot2 ) . 
Results 
Telomere length measurement ( MMqPCR ) 
We first examined DNA from dried blood spots ( DBS ) , which were 
collected from the I4 crew members before ( L-92, L-44, L-3 ) , during 
( FD1, FD2, FD3 ) , and after ( R + 1, R + 45, R + 82 ) spaceflight, from 
which DN A w as isolated, and telomer e length measur ed via m ulti- 
plexed quantitative PCR ( MMqPCR ) ( Fig. 1 A ) . Telomere elongation 
was observed in all four I4 cr e wmembers during spaceflight, as 
compared to their pre- and post-flight normalized means ( Fig. 1 A ) . 
Telomere length shortened rapidly upon return to Earth in 3 of 
the 4 astronauts ( post-flight ) , and overall continued to shorten 
over the course of the recovery period. Repeated-measurements 
ANOVA was performed on the data to assess the ov er all impact of 
time on telomere length. Post hoc pairwise comparisons identified 
pre-flight vs in-flight ( P < 0.001 ) and pre-flight vs R + 1 ( P < 0.02 ) 
as timepoints between which significant differences in telomere 
length occurred. 
Intriguingly, despite the short duration of the I4 mission ( 3 
days of orbital flight ) , these results correlated with findings from 
the NASA Twins Study ( One Year Mission astronaut ) , as well as 
with astronauts on ∼6 month missions onboard the International 
Space Station ( ISS ) [ 3 , 13 ]. 
Cell-free DNA 
Next, cell-free DN A ( cfDN A ) from the I4 crew’s plasma was ex- 
tr acted fr om Str ec k Cell-fr ee DNA BCT tubes and sequenced to 
compar e to pr e-flight baseline, post-flight, and r ecov ery period r e- 
sponses. Extraction and pre-processing of plasma were not imple- 
mented during the flight, so all samples were collected on Earth to 
mitigate cfDNA contamination from apoptotic blood cells during 
sample transportation ( Supplememtary Fig. S1A & B, see online 
supplementary material ) [ 8 ]. We analyzed plasma mitochondrial 
cfDN A ( cf-mtDN A ) r elativ e to the c hr omosomal cfDNA fr action 
( Fig. 1 B & C, S upplememtary Table S3 , see online supplementary 
material ) as a potential biomarker for long-duration spaceflight 
ada ptations. In this mission, cf-mtDNA le v els did not rise signif- 
icantly following the return to Earth ( R + 1 ) , possibly due to the 
short flight dur ation. Cf-mtDNA enric hment was onl y observ ed 
in the twin astronauts on the ISS after months of exposure to 
the space en vironment. T he marker le v els display high between- 
sample heterogeneity, and the increase in pre-flight measure- 
ments may be connected to the I4 cr e w’s pr e-flight pr epar ation 
( e.g. high-altitude training ) . 
Giv en that cfDNA fr a gments encompass one nucleosome ( ∼150 
bp ) , we inspected depletion in read coverage distribution around 
the transcription start sites ( TSS ) as a measurement of gene ex- 
pr ession [ 6 , 14 ]. We a pplied cov er a ge normalization specific to the 
genomic neighborhood and completed Fourier transformation to 
determine nucleosome footprints based on signal periodicity [ 7 ]. 
The cfDNA fr a gment tissue and cell-type-of-origin enric hment of 
fr a gments wer e corr elated with either tissue-specific expression 
signatur es fr om the Human Pr oteome Ma p ( HPM ) [ 12 ] or indi- 
vidual astr onaut expr ession pr ofiles fr om peripher al blood [ 15 ] 
( Fig. 1 D & E, S upplememtary Fig. S1C , S upplememtary Tables S1 
& S2 , see online supplementary material ) . The most r epr esented 
sequences were of hematopoietic origin, while a small increased 
pr esence of cfDNA fr a gments fr om both innate and ada ptiv e im- 
mune cells was observed post-landing and during the recovery 
period. Inter estingl y, ther e was a significant increase in the cfDNA 
originating from all immune cells in all astronauts over a month 
following their return to Earth ( R + 82 ) , indicating a degree of 
heterogeneity in cell lysis over time and a possible long-term re- 
sponse. 
Clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential 
( CHIP ) assessment 
While CHIP has been pr e viousl y studied in astronauts, the I4 co- 
hort provided an opportunity to study the physiological impact 

Genomic and cellular changes from spaceflight | 5 
Figure 1. Telomere length dynamics, mitochondrial, and cell-free DNA cell lysis Identity as a function of spaceflight. ( A ) Telomere length dynamics 
assessed by MMqPCR in I4 cr e w members. Normalized analysis shows increased average telomere length during orbital flight compared to pre-flight 
baseline and in R + 1 compared to pre-flight through Tuk e y-corrected re peated measures ANOVA ( P < 0.001 ) and ( P < 0.02 ) , r espectiv el y. A r a pid 
decr ease in telomer e length was also seen after landing during post-flight r ecov ery months. ( B ) Autosomes do not show an y spaceflight-r elated c hange 
in RPKM ( reads per kilobase per million reads ) , as exemplified using chr21. The cf-mtDNA is significantly more enriched in all samples—significance 
le v els ( P -v alue ) of the Wilcoxon test are as follows: Pre-Flight < 0.001, Post-Flight = 0.029, Recovery < 0.001. ( C ) Observed cf-mtDNA levels show high 
inter-sample heterogeneity. ( D ) Tissue of origin deconvolution for circulating cfDNA fr a gments r e v eals an incr eased cfDNA signatur e of both ada ptiv e 
and innate immune cells post-landing and during reco very. T he enrichment of tissue signatures from the HPM [ 13 ] was calculated based on inferred 
gene expression and nucleosomal footprinting of the cfDNA fragments. Average correlation coefficients ( multiplied by -1 ) over technical replicates are 
depicted for each sample and time point. The heatmap was subsetted to relevant tissue signatures; extended data is available in 
S upplememtary Fig. S1 and Table S1 , see online supplementary material. ( E ) Cross-examination of cfDNA origin deconvolution using each of I4 
astronaut cell-subpopulation-specific expression mark ers, deri ved from peripheral blood ( PBMC ) dataset, supports the results in D. We note an 
incr eased pr esence of innate and ada ptiv e imm une cfDNA in R + 1 and R + 82 when compar ed to all other timepoints . T he extended data is a vailable 
in S upplememtary Tables S2 , see online supplementary material. 

6 | Garcia-Medina et al. 
of spaceflight in a civilian cr e w that had ne v er under gone or- 
bital flight. Indeed, the monitoring of this cr e w pr ovides us with 
a unique opportunity to understand the beginning of the already 
established relationship between career astronauts and CHIP. Of 
note, the NASA Twins Study assessed the mutational burden of 
long-duration spaceflight in CHIP genes and a retrospective study 
established a burden of CH-related mutations in the career astro- 
naut population [ 3 , 4 ] and we sought to examine these same CHIP 
genes for the I4 cr e w . T o address the variant allele frequency ( VAF ) 
of CHIP genes, we performed deep targeted sequencing ( > 15,000x ) 
of 10 known epigenetic regulators and CHIP-associated genes and 
assessed the mutational burden of short duration spaceflight in 
the I4 astronaut cohort. Notably, the mutational burden of the 
CHIP-associated genes did not change as a function of spaceflight 
and remained stable for up to 6 months post spaceflight ( Fig. 2 A ) . 
No known deleterious mutations arose in the I4 cohort post-flight, 
nor did an y pr e-existing somatic mutations increase in allele fre- 
quency significantly ( Fig. 2 B & C ) . Putati ve dri ver mutations were 
found in two out of the four astronauts but their VAF remained 
comparable at all timepoints, indicating stability of the VAF from 
the spaceflight. 
To give context for these data, we next collected addi- 
tional samples for both subjects in the NASA Twins Study. 
Subject TW ( long duration spaceflight ) presented mutation 
TET2.p.Cys1273Tyr in a bulk PBMC sample at an increased VAF 
of ∼0.075 ( Fig. 2 D ) . Subject HR ( ground control ) presents the mu- 
tation DNMT3A.p.Trp698Ter at an increased VAF of ∼0.086 and 
the mutation DNMT3A.p.Asp856Gly not previously found at a VAF 
of ∼0.05 ( Fig. 2 E ) . Both astronauts presented increased clonality 
when compared to previous timepoints . T heir mutational burden 
was still greater than a ge-matc hed contr ols, as established in the 
original study. Ho w e v er, the incr eased m utational burden is an 
expected finding, given the association between aging and CHIP 
[ 16 ] and there’s no evidence of them having any clinical effects to 
date. 
Longitudinal comparison of whole genome 
muta tions re veals genomic stability months after 
short-dur a tion orbital flight 
To assess the long-term consequences of spaceflight on the ge- 
nomic stability of astronauts, we conducted whole-genome se- 
quencing ( WGS ) and variant calling pre- and post-flight. Compari- 
son of single nucleotide variant ( SNV ) and indel presence between 
timepoints ( L-44 and R + 45 ) for each astronaut indicated no sig- 
nificant changes for genes with the highest mutational burden 
( Fig. 3 A ) , epigenetic regulator genes ( S upplememtary Fig. S3 , see 
online supplementary material ) or other gene sets of interest. The 
analysis of variant annotations ( Fig. 3 A & C ) revealed that most 
identified variants are within intronic regions and have no signif- 
icant effects. We also have noted no disproportional mutational 
load for variants post-flight ( Fig. 3 D ) . We performed variant calling 
in single nucleus RNA-seq ( snRNA-seq ) libr aries and compar ed it 
across all timepoints and against WGS for genes with read cov- 
er a ge > 10x ( S upplememtary Fig. S3 B & C, see online supplemen- 
tary material ) . Whole genome cov er a ge of the snRNA-seq libraries 
v aried br oadl y acr oss timepoints, but did not show any significant 
evidence of genomic instability within our cohort. 
Spaceflight induces cell-type-specific changes in 
gene expression profiles 
We next examined gene expression changes across immune cell 
types due to spaceflight. Cell type-specific genes were used to fil- 
ter cell types computationally. CD8 + T cells, and CD4 + T cells, 
CD14 + monocytes, CD16 + monocytes, dendritic cells ( DCs ) and 
natural killer ( NK ) cells were filtered from PBMCs at six different 
timepoints: L-92, L-44, L-3, R + 1, R + 45, and R + 82. 
Gene expression of CD8 + T cells at R + 1 and R + 82 sho w ed 
incr eased expr ession of genes r elated to imm une function, ribo- 
somal and mitochondrial activity ( e.g. NKG7, CCL5, HLA-C, S100A4, 
RPL41, RPS11, MT-CO3, PTMA, B2M , see Fig. 4 B ) . Similar tr ends wer e 
seen with CD14 + monocytes , DCs , CD4 + , FCGR3A + monocytes , 
NK cells, and CD3D + cells ( S upplememtary Fig. S4 C & D, see on- 
line supplementary material ) . Increased gene expression of mi- 
tochondrial and ribosomal genes was conserved across cell types 
for both L-92 vs R + 1 and L-92 vs R + 82 comparisons. PLCG2, 
MTRNR2L12, VCAN, and MAML2 transcripts associated with im- 
m une function, mitoc hondrial function, cell adhesion, and Notc h 
signaling wer e consistentl y downr egulated acr oss all cell types 
( Fig. 4 & S upplememtary Fig. S4 ) . 
Inter estingl y, the pr oportion of cells expr essing these genes 
does not necessarily change in parallel with total gene expres- 
sion le v els . For example , PLCG2 expression, on a per cell basis, 
decreased, but the total proportion of cells expressing PLCG2 in- 
creased among CD8 + T cells at R + 1 ( 0.98 ) vs. L-92 ( 0.81 + /- 0.07 
s .e . ) and R + 1 vs. R + 82 ( 0.66 + /- 0.04 s .e . ) , classical monocytes 
at R + 1 ( 0.99 ) vs. L-92 ( 0.96 + /- 0.01 s.e. ) and R + 1 vs. R + 82 
( 0.92 + /- 0.05 s .e . ) as well as DCs at R + 1 ( 0.99 ) vs. L-92 ( 0.96 + /- 
0.01 s .e . ) and R + 1 vs . R + 82 ( 0.92 + /- 0.04 s .e . ) ( Fig. 4 A, C & E ) . 
Gene expression of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase, partic- 
ularly subunits 2 and 3 ( MT-CO2 & MT-CO3 ) , incr eased acr oss all 
cell types, per cell, for R + 1 compared to L-92 and R + 82, with 
no significant change in the proportion of cells expressing these 
genes. MTRNR2L12 expression was consistently decreased across 
all studied cell types for R + 1 vs. L-92 but gr eatl y incr eased for 
R + 82 vs. L-92 and R + 82 vs. R + 1, suggesting changes in gene 
expression lasting over two months post-flight in both adaptive 
and innate immune cells. 
Discussion 
The I4 mission is the first study to date to analyze the effect 
of short duration spaceflight on civilians using a compr ehensiv e 
m ulti-omics a ppr oac h. Our findings, including telomer e length 
dynamics, CHIP-related clonal expansion, WGS genomic stabil- 
ity, cfDNA cell lysis analysis, and immune cell longitudinal gene 
expr ession pr ofiling, br oadl y contextualize the physiological bur- 
dens of short duration spaceflight. This study adds key CHIP and 
genetic data on astr onauts, whic h ar e limited, and can serve as a 
r efer ence for futur e spaceflight planning, short missions around 
Earth’s orbit, and longer-duration missions into deep space. 
The NASA Twins Study was the first to report spaceflight- 
specific telomere elongation in humans, with one astronaut expe- 
riencing telomere elongation during his one-year mission, rapid 
telomere shortening upon return to Earth, and telomere length 
r ecov ery to near pre-flight baseline values over the following 
months, although many more short telomeres after spaceflight 
than befor e wer e also observ ed [ 3 ]. Luxton et al. reported similar 
spaceflight-associated telomere length dynamics in 3 unrelated 
astronauts on ∼6-month missions onboard the ISS [ 13 ]. It was hy- 
pothesized that such dramatic shifts in telomere length dynam- 
ics were associated with c hr onic exposur e to the space radiation 
envir onment and r epr esented an ada ptiv e r esponse to c hr onic ox- 
idativ e dama ge, specificall y to telomer es, wher eby the alternativ e 
lengthening of telomeres ( ALT ) pathway is transiently activated in 
normal somatic cells [ 13 ]. Cytogenetic evidence of heterogeneous 

Genomic and cellular changes from spaceflight | 7 
Figure 2. Targeted deep sequencing of CHIP-related genes exhibit genomic stability and comparable mutational burden as a function of spaceflight. 
( A ) Putati ve dri ver mutational burden of CHIP-related genes were found in two out of the four astronauts, longitudinal follow-ups demonstrate 
stability during the months leading and following spaceflight. ( B&C ) Variant allele frequency of putative driver mutations ( chr2: g.25235778C > G, 
chr2: g.25234347G > C, chr2: g.25241591C > A, chr2: g.25246732GTCGTGGC AC ACCGGGAAC AGCTTCCCCGC > G, chr2: g.25247647G > A, chr22: 
g.28734438C > T, chr20: g.32434638AG > A, chr4: g.105275662G > T ) in subjects 003 and 004 remained comparable both during pre-flight timepoints 
and post-flight r ecov ery. ( D&E ) Comparison of variant allele frequency of TET2.p.Cys1273Tyr mutation in TW ( spaceflight ) subject of the NASA Twins 
Study and variant allele frequency of DNMT3A.p.Trp698Ter and de-novo mutation DNMT3A.p.Asp856Gly in HR ( ground subject ) sho w ed a relative 
stable VAF during the initial stages of the study but an increased variant allele frequency through a 6 year follow-up period. 

8 | Garcia-Medina et al. 
Figure 3. Whole genome sequencing and variant calling reveals genomic stability post-flight. ( A ) Comparison of variant consequences before and after 
spaceflight of genes with the greatest mutational burden demonstrates no gene is disproportionately mutated post-flight. We report unique counts of 
( variant, effect annotation ) pairs per gene of interest. ( B ) De novo mutational comparison elucidates comparable mutational burdens at a 
genome-wide scale. Here we count variants as unique changes of reference to alternative alleles at a given position regardless of variant annotation. 
( C ) Variant effect annotation for variants called in both timepoints shows most mutations are in non-coding regions. Variant annotations were ranked 
according to the se v erity of the v ariant effect estimated by Ensembl [ 15 ]. We report unique counts of ( variant, effect annotation ) pairs across the whole 
genome. ( D ) Timepoint comparison of variant effect annotations across the whole genome shows no disproportional mutational load for variants 
called uniquely post-flight. Here we show the distribution for moderate to high-severity variants. 
telomere lengths and DNA damage responses were also reported, 
and—together with our cfDNA enrichment analyses—suggested 
incr eased DNA dama ge and ar e consistent with space r adia- 
tion exposure and increased senescence-associated foci. Similar 
changes in telomere length dynamics observed in the I4 crew as 
a function of spaceflight indicate that telomere length alterations 
are fast-acting as associated with spaceflight, even for missions of 
short ( e .g. da ys ) dur ation. Circulating cell-fr ee DNA ( cfDNA ) fr a g- 
ments, originating fr om v arious tissues and the immune system, 
offer a non-inv asiv e method for assessing astronauts’ dynamic 
imm une r esponses to spaceflight-induced physiological str ess. As 
an emerging biomarker, cfDNA concentration and molecular pro- 
file yield valuable insights into stress responses in unique space- 
flight environments despite its heterogeneous and sensitive na- 
ture. 
Our study indicates that the impact of short-duration space- 
flight on cfDNA concentration in astronaut plasma is subtler than 
long duration missions, but increased innate and adaptive im- 
mune system activity is still apparent. Moreover, cfDNA enrich- 
ment from all immune cells persists post-flight, suggesting a de- 
la yed response in volving immune cell turnover and active DNA 
r epair mec hanisms . T his phenomenon warrants further in vesti- 
gation as it is imper ativ e for both short and long duration space- 
flight to elucidate the temporal changes to immune cell types in 
order to better predict and prevent future risks. 
Effects of short and long dur a tion spaceflight on 
CHIP genomic alter a tions in civilian and career 
astronauts 
In the I4 cohort, we found no relationship between space- 
flight and increased CHIP-related genetic abnormalities in the 
scale of three months after spaceflight. With our deep se- 
quencing targeted probe approach ( Mean Depth ∼15,000x ) , we 
found putativ e m utations pr esent in subject C004’s and C003 

Genomic and cellular changes from spaceflight | 9 
Figure 4. Differential gene expression and frequency of specific immune subsets reveals conserved, long and short-term adaptations across adaptive 
and innate immune cells. ( A ) F requenc y of CD8 T cells expressing genes. ( B-E ) CD8 T cell volcano plot comparison of differential gene expression in 
L-92 vs R + 1, L-92 vs R + 82 & R + 1 vs R + 82. ( F ) Proportion of classical monocytes expressing genes. ( G-J ) Classical monocytes longitudinal 
differ ential expr ession in L-92 vs R + 1, L-92 vs R + 82, R + 1 vs R + 82 & R + 1 vs all timepoints. ( K ) Pr oportion of dendritic cells expr essing genes. ( L-O ) 
Dendritic cells longitudinal differential expression in L-92 vs R + 1, L-92 vs R + 82, R + 1 vs R + 82 & R + 1 vs all timepoints. 

10 | Garcia-Medina et al. 
targeted samples but not C001 and C002. DNMT3A gene mu- 
tations chr2: g.25235778C > G, chr2: g.25234347G > C, chr2: 
g.25241591C > A are all missense variants with a likely 
low/moderate impact on function. A frameshift mutation, chr2: 
g.25246732GTCGTGGC AC ACCGGGAAC AGCTTCCCCGC > G, was 
detected in astronaut 004, as well as a stop-gain function mu- 
tation chr2: g.25247647G > A. Although DNMT3A presented the 
higher number of mutations, CHEK2 presented a missense mu- 
tation chr22: g.28734438C > T in C004, and ASXL1 presented a 
fr ameshift m utation c hr20: g.32434638AG > A in both C003 and 
C004. Ho w e v er, with a VAF of < 0.02 for all timepoints, although 
detectable, there is no evidence to suggest a clinical effect on the 
subjects , that is , spaceflight ha ving no discernible effects up to 
3 months post-flight. TET2 exhibited a missense mutation chr4: 
g.105275662G > T at a VAF ∼0.3 in C003. Ho w e v er, putativ e m u- 
tations in CH-linked genes were not found at disproportionate al- 
lele frequencies post-flight, nor were de novo mutations seen in the 
post-flight samples. 
Although our findings suggest that no pathological genomic al- 
ter ations occurr ed as a function of spaceflight in the I4 cohort, fur- 
ther longitudinal tr ac king of the astronauts will help us discern 
the long-term effects, if any, of short dur ation missions. Pr e vious 
studies of the relationship between clonal hematopoiesis and as- 
tronauts has elucidated that spaceflight incr eases pr oportion of 
CH abnormalities in subjects when compared to healthy controls 
[ 3 , 4 ]. It is not clear why that is the case, or when in an astronaut’s 
career these abnormalities begin to appear, a k e y limitation of 
studying career astronauts. Previous studies have also shown the 
influence of acute e v ents on the de v elopment of CH abnormali- 
ties, such as first responders from the world trade center tragedy 
[ 17 ]. Ther efor e, the I4 mission is uniquely positioned to character- 
ize the clonal dynamics associated with a short-duration flight, 
and will allow future comparisons between career astronaut CH 
abnormalities and civilian space tr av elers. Ther e is an opportunity 
to study the compound effects of spaceflight between missions on 
CH abnormalities if one or more of the I4 astr onauts r eturns to 
space . T his can be le v er a ged for a better understanding of long- 
term risk and clonal evolution. 
The space environment is known to be chronically inflamma- 
tory as astronauts in previous studies have reported increased 
inflammation markers with the flight duration [ 18–20 ]. In the 
NASA Twins Study, both career astronauts had increased mu- 
tational burden in epigenetic regulators such as DNMT3A and 
TET2 compared to prostate cancer patient controls. Although 
only one of the twins was in orbital spaceflight for a year, both 
twins displayed comparable CHIP-related mutations shortly af- 
ter flight and for se v er al years of follow-up [ 6 ]. We continue to 
monitor the CHIP-related mutational burden of both astronauts 
years post-flight. The VAF of mutations found in both subjects 
has, as expected, incr eased ov er time, and a new missense vari- 
ant has been identified in subject HR in the last 3-year follow- 
up. This is to be expected as CHIP-mutational burden is known 
to increase as a function of aging. Both astronauts, ho w ever, pre- 
sented clonal burdens that preceded their age-matched control 
for over two decades at the time of the original study. The fact 
that TW ( space subject ) did not present a greater mutational bur- 
den post-flight than HR ( ground control ) , despite the length of his 
last mission, might indicate that the ov er all number of flights, 
rather than their duration, is a greater extrinsic factor for clonal 
positive selection. The I4 cohort provides a unique opportunity to 
assess the short and long term physiological effects of a singu- 
lar spaceflight mission. As civilians, the I4 cohort’s physiological 
findings are likely a better representation of what first-time fliers 
may expect as we gear up toward an increased human presence in 
space. 
Mor eov er, the longitudinal comparison of point mutations and 
indels from whole-genome sequencing data supports the results 
of the targeted deep-sequencing CHIP panel, wher ein ther e is 
not a significant increase in the genome-wide mutational bur- 
den for first-flight civilian astronauts . T hese results favorably in- 
dicate that short-time spaceflight does not contribute to ov er all 
increased genomic instability, at least on a timescale of se v er al 
months post-flight. Extending the analysis to future missions and 
continuous longitudinal tr ac king for years post-flight could shed 
more light on the long-term consequences of spaceflight in rela- 
tion to its altitude and duration, or for low VAF alleles, as well as 
r epeated exposur e of astr onauts to space r adiation. 
Finally, we note that transient changes in mitochondrial gene 
expr ession wer e seen as a r esponse to spaceflight acr oss a br oad 
range of immune cells within the I4 cohort. Longitudinal gene ex- 
pr ession anal yses r e v ealed a conserv ed tr end acr oss both ada p- 
tive and innate immune cells that had not been described be- 
fore in the spaceflight liter atur e. In comparisons between L-92 vs 
R + 1 and R + 1 vs R + 82 all immune cell types demonstrated 
incr eased expr ession of MTRNRL12, MTRNR2L8, and MT-ND4L in 
R + 1. MTRNRL12 and MTRNR2L8 are pseudogenes thought to be 
involved in negative regulation of the execution phase of apop- 
tosis [ 21 ]. As suc h, incr eased MTRNRL12 & MTRNR2L8 expression 
could indicate a physiological attempt at r egulating incr eased im- 
m une cell death. Incr eased imm une cell apoptosis was seen in our 
cfDNA analysis, at all post-flight timepoints, providing support to 
the gene expression alterations seen. 
Of note, MT-CO2 and MT-CO3 gene expr ession wer e downr eg- 
ulated post-flight ( R + 1 ) compared to pre-flight ( L-92 ) within 
CD86 + DCs , NC AM + NK cells , CD14 + monocytes , and CD3 
delta + CD8 + & CD4 + T cells ( Fig. 4 B, D, F & s upplememtary Fig. 
S4 B, D, F, H ) . MT-CO2 and MT-CO3 encode subunits of cytoc hr ome 
c oxidase, which is involved in the reduction of oxygen to water. 
Decreases in MT-CO2 and MT-CO3 expression cause significant cy- 
toc hr ome c oxidase and mitochondrial complex IV deficiencies, 
which may lead to tissue maladaptations [ 22 , 23 ]. Most mitochon- 
drial genes return to basal levels of expression in our L-92 vs 
R + 82 comparison, suggesting relief from spaceflight-induced mi- 
tochondrial o xidati ve stress . DCs , monocytes , and T cells showed 
incr eased MT-ND4L expr ession ov er two months after r eturn fr om 
flight. The MT-ND4L gene encodes for NADH-ubiquinone oxidore- 
ductase chain 4L, a component of the respiratory chain Complex I, 
a pr otein r equir ed for electr on tr ansfer and dehydr ogenation fr om 
NADH to ubiquinone. Longitudinal changes in its gene expression 
may suggest that mitochondrial ATP production is altered long af- 
ter return to earth. Ho w ever, whether the gene expression is repre- 
sentativ e of decr eased activity of the electr on tr ansport c hain or 
if it is a physiological response seeking to r estor e mitoc hondrial 
function due to the hypofunctional aberrant effects of o xidati ve 
str ess, r emains to be elucidated. 
In the spaceflight liter atur e, human induced pluripotent stem 
cell-deri ved cardiom yocytes had increased expression of genes re- 
lated to the mitochondrial electron transport chain, mitochon- 
drial transit peptide, mitochondrial translocation, and mitoribo- 
somes [ 24 ]. The NASA Twins Study also r e v ealed tr ansient en- 
richment of mitochondrial signaling that returned to baseline in 
the r ecov ery period [ 25 ]. Our findings, in contr ast, r e v eal a mor e 
complex picture of mitochondrial gene expression changes where 
some ar e consistentl y upr egulated acr oss cell types and others 
ar e tr ansientl y downr egulated in R + 1 but return to basal le v els 
in R + 82. 

Genomic and cellular changes from spaceflight | 11 
Immune adaptations to short duration 
spaceflight 
Immune system dysregulation in crewmembers following space- 
flight has been consistentl y r eported, r e v ealing ada ptiv e imm une 
system changes and general shifts to w ar ds a Th2 T cell pheno- 
type [ 26 , 27 ]. Space environment exposure leads to suppressed 
activ ation and r eduction in T cells, along with fluctuations in cy- 
tokine gene expr ession, suc h as increased TNF-a, interleukin-8, 
interleukin-1r a, thr ombopoietin, VEGF, and v arious c hemokines 
[ 2 , 27 , 28 ]. Our PBMC phenotype analysis offers insight into alter- 
ations within immune cell subpopulations, cell state, and geno- 
type associated with short-duration orbital flight in an all-civilian 
cr e w. PLCG2 is known for its role in immune cell signaling by cleav- 
ing PIP2 into IP3 and diacylgl ycer ol ( DAG ) , k e y second messenger 
molecules that are involved in immune and growth factor recep- 
tors [ 29 ]. Additionally, although the exact physiological pathway 
is not known, PLCG2 has been found to positiv el y affect mito- 
c hondrial r espir ation [ 30 ]. Dendritic cells exhibit incr eased AHR 
expression in R + 1 vs L-92 ( Fig. 4 , Supplememtary Fig. S4 C ) , a 
transcription factor known to promote the de v elopment of pr o- 
inflammatory Th17 and Th22 cells [ 31 , 32 ]. T-helper ( CD4 + ) pop- 
ulations pr esent decr eased IL-32 expr ession ( Supplememtary Fig. 
S4 D ) in R + 82 time points r elativ e to pr e-flight L-92, suggesting 
the tr ansient c hanges to ada ptiv e imm une function can last up 
to two months, a finding concurrent with the body of literature of 
spaceflight r esearc h [ 33 ]. 
Immune dysfunction involving cytotoxic T cells is a pro- 
posed side effect of space tr av el [ 34 ], associated with an ele- 
vated risk of opportunistic infections during spaceflight, such 
as latent herpes virus reactivation [ 35 ]. Short-term exposure 
to spaceflight conditions may affect innate immune system 
components, including functional alterations of k e y immune 
cell populations like CD14 + monocytes and dendritic cells. 
Micr ogr avity-induced c hanges can r esult in decr eased neutr ophil 
and macr opha ge pha gocytic activity, thus affecting the initial re- 
sponse to pathogens . Moreo ver, microgra vity ma y alter monocyte 
maturation and function, which play a critical role in antigen pre- 
sentation and T cell activation. Kaur et al. ( 2005 ) describe that, al- 
though the percentage of CD14 + monocytes was not significantly 
reduced in astronauts following spaceflight, days after landing, 
the ability of these cells to engulf pathogens , degranulate , and 
mount an imm une r esponse was reduced compared to that of 
gr ound contr ols [ 36 ]. Though little is known about the influence of 
spaceflight on dendritic cell function, their role in inflammation is 
well c har acterized as the y play k e y roles in modulating cytokine 
pr oduction, mediating migr ation, and enhancing antigen ca ptur e 
and processing [ 37 ]. 
Finally, while the long-term effects of short-duration space- 
flight on the immune system and the genome ar e minimall y un- 
derstood, particularly in civilians and first-fliers, these data are 
critical as we expand human presence in orbit and deep space. 
Additional studies are needed across varying cell types, mission 
dur ation, and cr e w bac kgr ound, whic h can also help guide coun- 
termeasures. 
Of note, the short-duration space shuttle studies revealed de- 
cr eased l ymphocyte r esponse, post-flight neutr ophil incr ease, and 
eosinophil decr ease, corr elating with in-flight str ess r ather than 
micr ogr avity [ 28 , 38 , 39 ]. Latent her pesvirus r eactiv ation and cy- 
tomegalovirus shedding were also observed during space shuttle 
flights [ 18 ]. Similar adaptations occurred during ISS missions, as 
cr e w members experienced mild infectious diseases, atypical al- 
lergies, or dermatitis without significant operational impact [ 18 , 
32 ], which seemed to be a function of mission duration. A 12-year 
ISS immune data comparison indicated improvements in immu- 
nity, stress, and viral reactivation due to operational and biomedi- 
cal countermeasures onboard ISS, such as resupply frequency, im- 
pr ov ements in personal communication, exercise equipment, and 
food quality and variety, suggesting the potential for improved 
quality of life on the health of astr onauts [ 40 ]. Suc h oper ational 
and biomedical considerations from earlier missions, as well as 
the cellular and molecular data shown here, can help future crews 
and missions maintain cr e w health and safety, as well as guide ef- 
forts for lifetime health studies of astronauts. 
Conflict of interest 
Christopher E. Mason is a co-Founder of Cosmica Biosciences. 
Braden Tierney is compensated for consulting with Seed Health 
and Enzymetrics Biosciences on microbiome study design and 
holds an ownership stake in the former. K ell y Bolton r eceiv es r e- 
search funding from Servier and Bristol Myers Squibb and serves 
on the medical advisory board of GoodCell. K ell y Blease , Juan 
Mor eno, Andr e w Boddic ker, Junhua Zhao, Bryan Lajoie, Andr e w Al- 
tomar e, Semyon Krugl yak, and Shawn Levy are emplo y ees of and 
have a financial interest in Element Biosciences. Irina Matei is a 
Co-Principal Investigator for research projects funded by Atossa 
Ther a peutics. Caleb M. Sc hmidt, Julian C. Sc hmidt, and Mic hael 
A. Sc hmidt hold shar es in Sov aris Holdings, LLC. Min Yu is the 
founder and president of CanTraCer Biosciences Inc. Authors not 
listed here do not have competing interests . Besides , as an Edi- 
torial Board Member of Precision Clinical Medicine , the correspond- 
ing author Christopher E. Mason was blinded from reviewing and 
making decision on this manuscript. 
Ac kno wledgements 
This study was supported by the Leukemia and Lymphoma 
Society ( Grants No. LLS 9238-16 and MCL7001-18 ) , the National 
Institutes of Health ( Grants No. P01C A214274, R01C A249054 and 
R01MH117406 ) , and the WorldQuant Foundation, NASA ( Grants 
No. 80NSSC19K0432, 80NSSC22K0254, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2, 
NNX13AE45G, NNX14AH50G, NNX17AB26G ) . 
Supplementary materials 
Supplementary materials are available at PCMEDI online. 
Data and code availability 
The data that support this study is available at the NASA 
GeneLab/NASA Open Science Data Repository with the 
identifiers 
OSD-630 
( https:// doi.org/ 10.26030/cyf k-5f 38 ) , 
OSD-570 
( https:// doi.org/ 10.26030/41s1-j243 ) , 
OSD-572 
( https:// doi.org/ 10.26030/x57b-4722 ) 
and 
OSD-573 
and 
( https:// doi.org/ 10.26030/x57b-4722 ) . 
Additional 
processed 
datasets ( gene catalogs, taxonomic and gene abundances ) are 
a vailable at https://figshare .com/projects/Longitudinal _ multi 
-omics _ analysis _ of _ host _ microbiome _ architecture _ and _ imm 
une _ responses _ during _ short-term _ spaceflight/176043 . 
This 
Figshar e r e pository ad ditionall y contains figur es detailing the 
top most abundant taxa for each alignment algorithm before 
and after decontamination, and additional data, methods, 
and detailed cr e w bac kgr ound can be found in the collections 
pa per, pr otocol pa pers, and additional SOMA pac ka ge pa pers 

12 | Garcia-Medina et al. 
[ 41–51 ]. Select data can be visualized online through the SOMA 
Data Explorer: https://soma.weill.cornell.edu . The GenBank 
viral database used was the most recent as of 2022-07-26. The 
GTDB database used was the 202 release . T he MetaPhlan4 
database 
w as 
mpa_vJ an21_CHOCOPhlAnSGB_202103. 
The 
Kraken2 database contained all NCBI listed taxa ( bacteria, 
fungal, and viral genomes ) in RefSeq, as of 2022-09-01. The 
Phanta database was the most recent as of 2022-08-01. The 
Bakta databases were the most recent as of 2022-08-18. Code 
used to generate Figures and analyses from this project is avail- 
able at the GitHub repository for code sharing and annotation: 
https://github.com/eliah- o/inspiration4- omics . 
References 
1.
Stepanek J, Blue RS, P ar azynski S. Space medicine in the era of 
civilian spaceflight. N Engl J Med 2019; 380 :1053–60. https://doi.or 
g/ 10.1056/ NEJMra1609012 .
2.
Crucian BE, Zwart SR, Mehta S et al. Plasma cytokine concentra- 
tions indicate that in vivo hormonal regulation of immunity is 
altered during long-duration spaceflight. J Interferon Cytokine Res 
2014; 34 :778–86. https:// doi.org/ 10.1089/ jir.2013.0129 .
3.
Garrett-Bakelman FE, Darshi M, Green SJ et al. The NASA twins 
study: A m ultidimensional anal ysis of a year-long human space- 
flight. Science 2019; 364 :eaau8650. https:// doi.org/ 10.1126/ scienc 
e.aau8650 .
4.
Br ojak owska A, Kour A, Thel MC et al. Retr ospectiv e anal ysis 
of somatic mutations and clonal hematopoiesis in astronauts. 
Commun Biol 2022; 5 :1–6. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ s42003- 022- 037 
77-z .
5.
Almeida-Porada G, Rodman C, Kuhlman B et al. Exposure of the 
bone marrow microenvironment to simulated solar and galactic 
cosmic radiation induces biological bystander effects on human 
hematopoiesis. Stem Cells Dev 2018; 27 :1237–56. https://doi.org/ 
10.1089/scd.2018.0005 .
6.
Mencia-Trinchant N, MacKay MJ, Chin C et al. Clonal 
hematopoiesis before, during, and after human spaceflight. 
Cell Rep 2020; 33 :108458. https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.celrep.2020.10 
8458 .
7.
Bezdan D, Grigor e v K, Meydan C et al. Cell-fr ee DN A ( cfDN A ) and 
exosome profiling from a year-long human spaceflight reveals 
circulating biomarkers. iScience 2020; 23 . https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/ 
j.isci.2020.101844 .
8.
Sperling AS, Gibson CJ, Ebert BL. The genetics of m yelod ysplastic 
syndr ome: fr om clonal haematopoiesis to secondary leukaemia. 
Nat Rev Cancer 2017; 17 :5–19. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ nrc.2016.1 
12 .
9.
Freed D, Aldana R, Weber J et al. The Sentieon Genomics Tools—
A fast and accurate solution to variant calling from next- 
gener ation sequence data. Pr eprint fr om bioRxiv , 10 Mar 2017. 
https:// doi.org/ 10.1101/ 115717 ,
10. Novetsk y F riedman D, Chan ICC, Mosko witz CS et al. Clonal 
hematopoiesis in survivors of childhood cancer. Blood Adv 
2023; 7 :4102–6. https:// doi.org/ 10.1182/ bloodadvances.20230098 
17 .
11. Bolton KL, Ptashkin RN, Gao T et al. Cancer ther a py sha pes 
the fitness landscape of clonal hematopoiesis. Nat Genet 
2020; 52 :1219–26. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ s41588- 020- 00710- 0 .
12. Kim MS, Pinto SM, Getnet D et al. A draft map of the human 
proteome. Nature 2014; 509 :575–81. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ natu 
re13302 .
13. Luxton JJ, McKenna MJ, Lewis A et al. Telomere length dynam- 
ics and DNA damage responses associated with long-duration 
spaceflight. Cell Rep 2020; 33 :108457. https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.ce 
lrep.2020.108457 .
14. Ulz P, Thallinger GG, Auer M et al. Inferring expressed genes 
by whole-genome sequencing of plasma DNA. Nat Genet 
2016; 48 :1273–8. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ ng.3648 .
15. Ensembl 
Variation—Calculated 
consequences. 
https: 
//grc h37.ensembl.or g/info/genome/variation/pr ediction/pr 
edicted _ data.html ( Accessed April 18, 2023 ) .
16. von Bonin M, Jambor HK, Teipel R et al. Clonal hematopoiesis 
and its emerging effects on cellular ther a pies. Leukemia 
2021; 35 :2752–8. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ s41375- 021- 01337- 8 .
17. Jasra S, Giricz O, Zeig-Owens R et al. High burden of clonal 
hematopoiesis in first responders exposed to the World Trade 
Center disaster. Nat Med 2022; 28 :468–71. https:// doi.org/ 10.103 
8/s41591- 022- 01708- 3 .
18. Sto w e RP, Mehta SK, Ferrando AA et al. Immune responses and 
latent her pesvirus r eactiv ation in spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ 
Med 2001; 72 :884–91.
19. Hellweg CE, Thelen M, Arenz A et al. The German ISS-experiment 
Cellular Responses to radiation in space ( CERASP ) : The effects 
of single and combined space flight conditions on mammalian 
cells. Adv Space Res 2007; 39 :1011–8. https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.as 
r.2006.11.015 .
20. Akiyama T, Horie K, Hinoi E et al. How does spaceflight affect 
the acquired immune system? NPJ Microgravity 2020; 6 :1–7. https: 
// doi.org/ 10.1038/ s41526- 020- 0104- 1 .
21. MTRNR2L12 MT-RNR2 like 12 ( pseudogene ) [Homo sapiens 
( human ) ]—Gene—NCBI. https:// www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/ 10 
0463498 ( Accessed April 18, 2023 ) .
22. Heidari MM, Mirfakhradini FS, Tayefi F et al. Novel point mu- 
tations in mitochondrial MT-CO2 gene may be risk factors for 
cor onary artery disease. A ppl Bioc hem Biotec hnol 2020; 191 :1326–
39. https:// doi.org/ 10.1007/ s12010- 020- 03275- 0 .
23. Chen W, Wang P, Lu Y et al. Decr eased expr ession of mi- 
tochondrial miR-5787 contributes to chemoresistance by re- 
pr ogr amming glucose metabolism and inhibiting MT-CO3 
translation. Theranostics 2019; 9 :5739–54. https:// doi.org/ 10.7150/ 
thno.37556 .
24. Wnorowski A, Sharma A, Chen H et al. Effects of spaceflight 
on human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived car diomy oc yte 
structure and function. Stem Cell Rep 2019; 13 :960–9. https://doi. 
org/ 10.1016/ j.stemcr.2019.10.006 .
25. da Silv eir a WA, Fazelinia H, Rosenthal SB et al. Compr ehensiv e 
m ulti-omics anal ysis r e v eals mitoc hondrial str ess as a centr al 
biological hub for spaceflight impact. Cell 2020; 183 :1185–201. ht 
tps:// doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.cell.2020.11.002 .
26. W ang P, T ian H, Zhang J et al. Spaceflight/micr ogr avity inhibits 
the pr olifer ation of hematopoietic stem cells by decr easing kit- 
ras/cAMP-CREB pathw ay netw orks as evidenced b y RN A-seq as- 
sa ys . FASEB J Off Publ Fed Am Soc Exp Biol 2019; 33 :5903–13. https: 
// doi.org/ 10.1096/ fj.201802413R .
27. Crucian BE, Choukèr A, Simpson RJ et al. Immune system dysreg- 
ulation during spaceflight: potential countermeasures for deep 
space exploration missions . F ront Immunol 2018; 9 :1437. https: 
// doi.org/ 10.3389/ fimmu.2018.01437 .
28. Crucian B, Sto w e RP, Mehta S. Alter ations in ada ptiv e imm u- 
nity persist during long-duration spaceflight. NPJ Microgravity 
2015; 1 :15013. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ npjmgrav.2015.13 .
29. PubChem . 
PLCG2–phospholipase C gamma 2 ( human ) . 
https:// pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/ PLCG2/ human 
( Accessed April 17, 2023 ) .
30. Y ang Y, Y ang Y, Huang H et al. PLCG2 can exist in eccDNA and 
contribute to the metastasis of non-small cell lung cancer by 

Genomic and cellular changes from spaceflight | 13 
r egulating mitoc hondrial r espir ation. Cell Death Dis 2023; 14 :1–
12. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ s41419- 023- 05755- 7 
31. Allan S. Tuning T cells through the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. 
Nat Rev Immunol 2008; 8 :326. https:// doi.org/ 10.1038/ nri2319 
32. McAleer JP, Fan J, Roar B et al. Cytokine regulation in hu- 
man CD4 T cells by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and GPR68. 
J Immunol 2018; 200 :116.8. https:// doi.org/ 10.4049/ jimmunol.200 
.Supp.116.8 
33. Crucian BE, Choukèr A, Simpson RJ et al. Immune system dysreg- 
ulation during spaceflight: potential countermeasures for deep 
space exploration missions . F ront Immunol 2018; 9 :1437. https: 
// doi.org/ 10.3389/ fimmu.2018.01437 .
34. Armstr ong JW, Gerr en RA, Cha pes SK. The effect of space and 
parabolic flight on macrophage hematopoiesis and function. Exp 
Cell Res 1995; 216 :160–8. https:// doi.org/ 10.1006/ excr.1995.1020 
35. Plett PA, Abonour R, Fr ank ovitz SM et al. Impact of modeled mi- 
cr ogr avity on migr ation, differ entiation, and cell cycle control 
of primitive human hematopoietic progenitor cells. Exp Hematol 
2004; 32 :773–81. https:// doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.exphem.2004.03.014 
36. Kaur I, Simons ER, Castro VA et al. Changes in monocyte func- 
tions of astronauts. Brain Behav Immun 2005; 19 :547–54. https: 
// doi.org/ 10.1016/ j.bbi.2004.12.006 
37. Worbs T, Hammerschmidt SI, Förster R. Dendritic cell migration 
in health and disease. Nat Rev Immunol 2017; 17 :30–48. https://do 
i.org/ 10.1038/ nri.2016.116 .
38. P aul AM, Mhatr e SD, Cekanaviciute E et al. Neutrophil-to- 
l ymphocyte r atio: A biomarker to monitor the immune status 
of astronauts . F ront Immunol 2020; 11 :564950. https:// doi.org/ 10 
.3389/fimmu.2020.564950 
39. Sto w e RP, Sams CF, Mehta SK et al. Leukocyte subsets and 
neutrophil function after short-term spaceflight. J Leukoc Biol 
1999; 65 :179–86. https:// doi.org/ 10.1002/ jlb.65.2.179 
40. Nelson GA. Space radiation and human exposures, a primer. 
Radiat Res 2016; 185 :349–58. https:// doi.org/ 10.1667/ RR14311.1 
41. Overbey EG, Ryon K, Kim J et al. The Space Omics and Medical 
Atlas ( SOMA ) : A compr ehensiv e data r esource and biobank for 
astronauts. Nature In press 2024.
42. Jones CJ, Overbey EG, Lacombe J et al. The SpaceX Inspiration4 
mission r e v eals inflight molecular and physiological metrics 
from an all-civilian crew. Nature In press 2024.
43. Kim J, Tierney B, Overbey EG et al. Single-cell multi-ome and im- 
m une pr ofiles of the Inspir ation4 cr e w r e v eal conserv ed, cell- 
type, and sex-specific responses to spaceflight. Nat Commun In 
press 2024.
44. Tierney B, Kim J, Overbey EG et al. The microbiome architecture 
of short-term spaceflight and its potential link to host immune 
activation. Nat Microbiol In press 2024.
45. P ark J, Ov erbey EG, Nar ayanan S et al. Spatial multi-omics of hu- 
man skin r e v eals KRAS and inflammatory responses to space- 
flight. Nat Commun In press 2024.
46. Grigor e v K, Nelson T, Overbey EG et al. Direct RNA sequencing 
of astronauts reveals spaceflight-associated epitranscriptome 
c hanges and str ess-r elated tr anscriptional r esponses. Nat Com- 
mun In press 2024.
47. Overbey EG, Ryon K, Kim J et al. Collection of biospecimens from 
the Inspiration4 Mission establishes the standards for the Space 
Omics and Medical Atlas ( SOMA ) . Nat Commun In press 2024.
48. Houerbi N, Kim J, Ov erbey EG et al. Secr etome pr ofiling ca ptur es 
acute changes in o xidati ve stress, brain homeostasis and coag- 
ulation from spaceflight. Nat Commun In press 2024.
49. Rutter L, MacKay M, Cope H et al. Pr otectiv e alleles and pr ecision 
healthcare in crewed spaceflight. Nat Commun In press 2024.
50. Rutter L, Cope H, MacKay M et al. Astronaut omics and the im- 
pact of space on the human body at scale. Nat Commun In press 
2024.
51. Fu W, Du H, Overbey E et al. Single Cell Analysis identifies con- 
serv ed featur es of imm une dysfunction in sim ulated micr ogr av- 
ity and spaceflight. Nat Commun In press 2024.
Recei v ed 29 J an uar y 2024; acce pted 24 Mar c h 2024. published 8 April 2024 
© The Author ( s ) 2024. Published by Oxford Uni v ersity Pr ess on behalf of the W est China School of Medicine & W est China Hospital of Sichuan Uni v ersity. This is an Open Access article distributed under the 
terms of the Cr eati v e Commons Attribution License ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) , which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original 
work is pr operl y cited. 
