HLB1 Is a Tetratricopeptide Repeat Domain-Containing
Protein That Operates at the Intersection of the Exocytic and
Endocytic Pathways at the TGN/EE in Arabidopsis
OPEN
J. Alan Sparks,a Taegun Kwon,a Luciana Renna,b Fuqi Liao,c Federica Brandizzi,b and Elison B. Blancaﬂora,1
a Plant Biology Division, The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma 73401
b Department of Energy, Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824
c Computing Services Department, The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma 73401
ORCID IDs: 0000-0002-0205-8535 (T.K.); 0000-0001-6115-9670 (E.B.B.)
The endomembrane system plays essential roles in plant development, but the proteome responsible for its function and
organization remains largely uncharacterized in plants. Here, we identiﬁed and characterized the HYPERSENSITIVE TO
LATRUNCULIN B1 (HLB1) protein isolated through a forward-genetic screen in Arabidopsis thaliana for mutants with
heightened sensitivity to actin-disrupting drugs. HLB1 is a plant-speciﬁc tetratricopeptide repeat domain-containing protein
of unknown function encoded by a single Arabidopsis gene. HLB1 associated with the trans-Golgi network (TGN)/early
endosome (EE) and tracked along ﬁlamentous actin, indicating that it could link post-Golgi trafﬁc with the actin cytoskeleton
in plants. HLB1 was found to interact with the ADP-ribosylation-factor guanine nucleotide exchange factor, MIN7/BEN1
(HOPM INTERACTOR7/BREFELDIN A-VISUALIZED ENDOCYTIC TRAFFICKING DEFECTIVE1) by coimmunoprecipitation. The
min7/ben1 mutant phenocopied the mild root developmental defects and latrunculin B hypersensitivity of hlb1, and analyses
of a hlb1/ min7/ben1 double mutant showed that hlb1 and min7/ben1 operate in common genetic pathways. Based on these
data, we propose that HLB1 together with MIN7/BEN1 form a complex with actin to modulate the function of the TGN/EE at
the intersection of the exocytic and endocytic pathways in plants.
INTRODUCTION
Normal plant development relies on the endomembrane system
as it plays a central role in directing the delivery of enzyme
complexes and polysaccharide precursors to the cell surface and
to the vacuole (Kim and Brandizzi, 2014; Kim et al., 2015). In
addition, protein trafﬁc through endomembranes is pivotal for
specifying how plants respond and adapt to a range of biotic and
abiotic stresses (Chen et al., 2008; Lozano‐Durán et al., 2014;
Garcia de la Garma et al., 2015). The endomembrane system is
highly dynamic and consists of a network of functionally inter-
connected organelles beginning with the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) where proteins are synthesized and then trafﬁcked to the
plasma membrane (PM) and vacuole after processing and sorting
in the Golgi apparatus and post-Golgi organelles (Richter et al.,
2009; Brandizzi and Barlowe, 2013). Recycling and degradation of
PM proteins, which also are facilitated by the endomembrane
trafﬁcking machinery, are essential for establishing and main-
taining the polar localization of lipids and critical proteins, in-
cluding auxin carriers, transmembrane receptors, channels, and
ion transporters that regulate diverse physiological processes in
plants (Geldner et al., 2007; Takano et al., 2010; Barberon and
Geldner, 2014; Hachez et al., 2014; Doyle et al., 2015).
Among the various organelles that comprise the endomem-
brane system, the trans-Golgi network (TGN) is arguably the most
mysterious. The complexity of TGN function stems from the fact
that it lies at the intersection of secretory and endocytic pathways,
through which cargo destined for the PM and vacuole transit
(Contento and Bassham, 2012; Gendre et al., 2015). In contrast to
mammalian cells, there is mounting evidence that the TGN in
plants functions as an early endosome (EE) that directly receives
cargo taken up via endocytosis for recycling back to the PM or
directed to the vacuole for degradation (Dettmer et al., 2006; Viotti
et al., 2010). In recent years, much has been learned about the
structure and dynamics of the plant TGN. Using transmission
electrontomographyonhigh-pressurefrozenArabidopsisthaliana
roots, for example, it was shown that the formation of the TGN
occurs through distinct structural changes including separation of
trans-most Golgi cisterna via a peeling mechanism and secretory
vesicle budding from the plane of the original trans-Golgi cisterna
(Kang et al., 2011). In another study, live-cell spinning-disc con-
focal microscopy of Arabidopsis hypocotyl cells uncovered the
formation of thin tube-like protrusions connecting two TGN/EE
units prior to their homotypic fusion (Viotti et al., 2010). Further-
more, live-cell super-resolution microscopy described two types
of TGN in Arabidopsis roots: a Golgi-associated TGN on the trans-
side of the Golgi apparatus and a Golgi-independent TGN that
moved independently of Golgi bodies (Uemura et al., 2014).
In addition to new knowledge about its structure and dynamics,
several protein components of the plant TGN have been dis-
covered that mediate crucial aspects of post-Golgi membrane
trafﬁc and maintain TGN integrity. These TGN resident proteins
include soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment
1 Address correspondence to eblancaﬂor@noble.org.
The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁndings
presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the
Instructions for Authors (www.plantcell.org) is: Elison B. Blancaﬂor
(eblancaﬂor@noble.org).
OPENArticles can be viewed without a subscription.
www.plantcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1105/tpc.15.00794
The Plant Cell, Vol. 28: 746–769, March 2016, www.plantcell.org ã 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

protein receptors, the so-called SYNTAXINS of PLANTS (SYPs),
vacuolar H+-ATPases, adaptor protein complexes, small mono-
meric GTPases of the ADP ribosylation factor (ARF) and RAS
genes from rat brain (RAB) families, and the ECHIDNA/YPT/RAB
GTPase complex (Dettmer et al., 2006; Chow et al., 2008; Zouhar
et al., 2009; Gendre et al., 2011, 2013; Uemura et al., 2012; Asaoka
et al., 2013; Naramoto et al., 2014). Whereas many of the plant
TGN-localized proteins are evolutionarily conserved in eukary-
otes, some appear to be unique to the plant post-Golgi trafﬁcking
machinery (Ebine et al., 2008, 2011; Fujimoto and Ueda, 2012),
and it is likely that more factors remain uncharacterized.
Mobility of organelles within the cell is typically driven by the
cytoskeleton, a network of ﬁlamentous proteins that consists
of microtubules, microﬁlaments, and intermediate ﬁlaments.
Microﬁlaments, also known as ﬁlamentous actin (F-actin), as-
semble in an energy-dependent manner from monomeric globular
actin (G-actin) units to form two-stranded, helical structures that
are ;5 to 7 nm in diameter (Li et al., 2014). The higher order or-
ganization of the actin cytoskeleton consists mostly of bundles
and cables, and their assembly into these structures is speciﬁed
byseveralactinbindingproteinssuchasﬁmbrin,villin,proﬁlin,LIM
domain-containing proteins, thrumin, and crolin (Papuga et al.,
2010; Whippo et al., 2011; Su et al., 2012; Jia et al., 2013; Qu et al.,
2013;Sunetal.,2013).ThemovementanddynamicsoftheERand
the various organelles that make up the plant endomembrane
system are largely dependent on the actin cytoskeleton, as
demonstrated using actin-disrupting drugs such as latrunculin B
(LatB) and cytochalasin D (Boevink et al., 1998; Nebenführ et al.,
1999; Sparkes et al., 2009). However, actin appears to be dis-
pensable for protein transport between the ER and Golgi appa-
ratus (Brandizzi et al., 2002). While it was shown that cargo trafﬁc
from the Golgi to the vacuoles requires an intact actin cytoskel-
eton, the underlying mechanisms by which this process is ac-
complished are unknown (Kim et al., 2005).
There is a wealth of information on the relationship between
post-Golgi trafﬁc and its mediation by the actin cytoskeleton in
yeast and animal cells. Most of the evidence to date in these
systems has pointed toward a pivotal role for F-actin and its
associated regulatory and motor proteins in post-Golgi vesicle
biogenesisandmembranedeformation(AniteiandHoﬂack,2012).
In mammalian HeLa cells, for example, myosin 1b was shown to
generate the forces that regulate the assembly of F-actin foci for
tubule formation at the TGN (Almeida et al., 2011). In another class
of mammalian cells called 3T3, the actin-related protein 2/3
(ARP2/3) complex and their activators in the WASP (Wiskott-
Aldrich syndrome protein) family drive the nucleation of F-actin on
endosomes, which is necessary to promote endosome ﬁssion
(Derivery et al., 2009). Recently, a combination of elegant optical
tweezer and live-cell confocal imaging in human epithelial cells
demonstrated that the actin cytoskeleton confers rigidity to the
Golgi complex, making it stiffer than the surrounding cytoplasm. It
was proposed that mechanical stress imposed by actin affects
membrane budding and ﬁssion during intra-Golgi transport (Guet
et al., 2014).
In plants, several actin binding proteins appear to link actin
dynamics with membrane trafﬁcking. Many of these proteins,
such as the ARP2/3 complex, proﬁlin, formins, and capping
proteins, which localize to the PM and various membranes of
organelles within the endomembrane system, have orthologs in
other eukaryotes (Zhang et al., 2010, 2013; Sun et al., 2013;
Jimenez-Lopez et al., 2014; Cvrcková et al., 2015). In fact, some of
the mechanisms by which F-actin on membranes is nucleated and
polymerizedinplantsmirrorthoseofanimalsandyeast,wheresmall
GTPases of the Rho family directly activate membrane-localized
actin nucleators (Takenawa and Suetsugu, 2007). For example,
genetic and biochemical studies in Arabidopsis showed that a Rho
of plants (ROP)-guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) protein
calledSPIKE1regulatesF-actinpolymerizationthroughtheARP2/3
complex (Basu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2010).
Recently, a number of plant-speciﬁc proteins that function as
actin membrane adaptors have been uncovered. One example is
RISAP, a TGN-localized ROP-GTPase effector that interacts with
F-actin and binds to the globular tail domain of myosin XI in to-
bacco (Nicotiana tabacum) pollen tubes. RISAP is ;33% identical
to the Arabidopsis family of myosin binding proteins at the amino
acid level (Peremyslov et al., 2013). It was proposed that the
RISAP-mediated interaction between the actin cytoskeleton and
endomembrane system is an essential component of the tip
growth machinery in pollen tubes (Stephan et al., 2014). Another
family of plant-speciﬁc proteins that mediate actin-endomem-
brane crosstalk is the 13-member Networked (NET) proteins.
These NET proteins interacted directly with F-actin through
a conserved N-terminal domain. The NET proteins were also
showntolocalizetoPM-ERcontactsitesandthetonoplast(Deeks
et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2014).
Here, we report the discovery of a plant-speciﬁc protein called
HLB1 (for HYPERSENSITIVE TO LATRUNCULIN B1) through
a forward-genetic screen in Arabidopsis seedlings for mutants
that exhibited differential responses to the inhibitory effects of
LatB on primary root growth. We determined that HLB1 tracks
along F-actin and colocalizes with the TGN/EE in vivo and that
hlb1 has marked defects in the recycling of proteins to the
PM after endocytic uptake. Furthermore, we identiﬁed the
ARF-GEF, MIN7/BEN1 (Nomura et al., 2006; Tanaka et al.,
2009), as an HLB1 interactor and showed that hlb1 functions
in a common genetic pathway as min7/ben1 in regard to LatB
hypersensitivity despite their opposite effects on membrane traf-
ﬁcking. These ﬁndings are signiﬁcant because they support the
conclusion that HLB1 represents a class of plant-speciﬁc proteins
that function at the crossroads of exocytic and endocytic trafﬁcking
pathways, possibly through mechanisms coordinated by the actin
cytoskeleton.
RESULTS
Isolation and Characterization of Arabidopsis Mutants
Hypersensitive to LatB
Approximately 20,000 T-DNA activation-tagged seedlings in the
Col-0backgroundweregrownonmediasupplementedwith100nM
LatB. Seedlings with signiﬁcantly reduced primary root length were
isolated and their progeny were retested for increased LatB sen-
sitivity. Three nonallelic mutants whose primary roots were hyper-
sensitive to LatB were identiﬁed and hlb1 was selected for further
study (Figures 1A to 1D). Hypocotyls of hlb1 grown in the dark and
root hairs of light-grown seedlings were also hypersensitive to LatB
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
747

(Supplemental Figure 1). Moreover, hlb1 primary roots displayed
increased sensitivity to cytochalasins, another class of actin-
disrupting compounds (Supplemental Figure 2). Analysis of 224 F2
seedlingsrevealeda172:52segregationofwildtype:mutantfora3:1
ratio (calculated x2 = 0.381 < x2
0.95 = 3.841), indicating that hlb1 is
recessiveinasingleMendelianlocus.Homozygoushlb1plantswere
backcrossed at least three times with Col-0 to reduce the frequency
of extraneous mutations.
Osmotic stress, salt stress, and the auxins indole-3-acetic acid
and1-naphthaleneaceticacidinhibitedprimaryrootgrowthinhlb1to
a similar extent as in the wild type, indicating that hlb1 is hyper-
sensitive only to LatB and cytochalasin, compounds that directly
interfere with actin polymerization (Supplemental Figure 3). The
response of other mutants to genes encoding actin regulatory
proteins including single mutants brk1, arp2, adf4, cpa1, cpb1, and
cpb3 and quadruple mutant scar1234 (Mathur et al., 2003; Dyachok
etal.,2011;Lietal.,2012,2015;Henty-Ridillaetal.,2014)toLatBwas
also compared with hlb1. These mutants exhibited wild-type sen-
sitivity to LatB. act8, a mutant of a root-expressed vegetative actin
isoform, also showed wild-type sensitivity to LatB. Although act2,
a mutant of another root-expressed vegetative actin isoform
(Kandasamy et al., 2009), was hypersensitive to LatB, its heightened
sensitivity to the chemical was not as severe as that of hlb1
(Supplemental Figure 4).
Cell Division, Cell Expansion, and F-Actin Organization in
hlb1 Are Hypersensitive to LatB
We asked whether the increased sensitivity of hlb1 roots to LatB
could be explained by inhibition of cell division, cell expansion, or
both. To address this question, cortical cell length in the root
elongation zone and cortical cell number in the meristem was
obtained fromconfocal microscopy analysesofpropidium iodide-
stained roots 2 d after transplanting seedlings on media with or
without 50 nM LatB (Supplemental Figure 5A). Both cortical cell
number in the root meristem and cortical cell length in the elon-
gation zone were reduced in LatB-treated hlb1 seedlings com-
pared with the wild type, indicating that inhibition of both processes
contributed to the hypersensitivity of the mutant to the drug
(Supplemental Figures 5B to 5E).
We next analyzed F-actin organization in cells of the elongation
zone of wild-type and hlb1 seedlings expressing the live-cell F-actin
reporter UBQ10pro:GFP-ABD2-GFP (Dyachok et al., 2014) trans-
planted to growthmedia with or without50 nM LatB. Cellsin the root
elongation zone of both genotypes on control medium showed
dense and randomF-actin arrays, a feature typical of cells within this
region (Figure 2A). When transplanted on LatB, wild-type cells
maintained their dense network of F-actin that roughly mirrored the
controls with the exception of a few ﬂuorescent aggregates. By
contrast, cells in the root elongation zone of LatB-treated hlb1 had
mostly diffuse ﬂuorescence, fewer distinct F-actin arrays, and more
numerous ﬂuorescent aggregates compared with the wild type
(Figure2A).ToquantifytheeffectofLatBonF-actinintegrity,ﬁlament
density(occupancy) incellsfromthe elongationzone wasmeasured
using an algorithm developed earlier (Higaki et al., 2010). Whereas
the wild type and hlb1 on the control medium and wild type on LatB-
supplemented medium had similar occupancy values, LatB-treated
hlb1 had signiﬁcantly lower F-actin occupancy values, indicating
Figure 1. Primary Root Growth of hlb1 Is Hypersensitive to LatB.
(A)to(C)Seedlingsofthewildtype(Col-0ecotype)andhlb12d([A]and[B])
and 6 d (C) after transplanting 3-d-old seedlings to growth media sup-
plemented with the solvent control solution (A) or 50 nM LatB ([B] and [C]).
Note hlb1 grown in LatB has shorter primary roots compared with the wild
type. Bars = 5 mm.
(D) Dose–response analyses of primary root growth (expressed as percent
ofcontrol) ofthewildtypeandhlb1 7dafter transplanting 4-d-oldseedlings
to different concentrations of LatB. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined
by one-way ANOVA. Means (n = 45 to 60 roots) 6 SE. Different letters are
signiﬁcantly different (P < 0.05, Tukey’s test).
748
The Plant Cell

that F-actin structures of hlb1 were indeed more sensitive to the
chemical (Figure 2B).
hlb1 Exhibits Reduced Root Hair and Primary Root Growth
in the Absence of LatB
Close examination of hlb1 seedlings revealed that they had mild
growth defects even when LatB was excluded from the growth
medium. Primary roots of hlb1 were slightly shorter than the wild
type at 3, 5, and 7 d after planting (Figures 3A and 3B). hlb1 root
hairs were also shorter than those of the wild type (Figures 3C to
3E). Furthermore, differential interference contrast (DIC) micros-
copy showed that hlb1 root hairs were wider and had subtle shape
distortions when compared with wild-type root hairs (Figure 3F).
As noted, distinct qualitative and quantitative differences in
F-actin organization in cells of the root elongation zone were
observed between wild-type and hlb1 seedlings but only when
treated with 50 nM LatB (Figure 2). We therefore evaluated F-actin
dynamics in root hairs, where growth differences between the wild
typeandhlb1appearedtobemorepronounced(Figures 3Cto3F).
In wild-type seedlings, the majority of the actively elongating root
hairs were characterized by a distinct enrichment of ﬁne and
dynamic meshwork of F-actin at the extreme apex (Figure 4A;
Supplemental Movie 1). In hlb1 root hairs, the tip-focused ﬁne
meshworkofF-actinwasnotalwaysobserved,andincaseswhere
it was present, it would often dissipate rapidly (Figure 4A; Sup-
plemental Movie 1). Similar results were obtained with wild-type
and hlb1 root hairs expressing the F-actin marker UBQ10pro:
Lifeact-mGFP, which was previously reported to clearly label
apical F-actin meshwork at the apex of pollen tubes and moss
protonema (Vidali et al., 2009). Using a 1003 oil immersion ob-
jective on the spinning-disc confocal microscope, wild-type root
hairs expressing UBQ10pro:Lifeact-mGFP had distinct ﬁlamentous
meshwork at the tip that would often dissipate in the tips of hlb1 root
hairs (Figure 4B; Supplemental Movie 2). F-actin tip dynamics in the
wild type and hlb1 were quantiﬁed from 3-min time-lapse movies of
growing roots hairs by obtaining the ratio of the total time where the
apical meshwork of F-actin was clearly visible to the total time
elapsed (Figure 4B). This ratio provided an indication of the per-
centage of time that the roothair wasable to maintain its tip-focused
ﬁne meshwork of F-actin as it elongated. These analyses showed
that hlb1 root hairs had a signiﬁcantly lower ratio value than the wild
type, indicating that the mutant largely failed to maintain its tip-
focused ﬁne meshwork of F-actin (Figure 4C).
We also asked whether hlb1 mutants had any measureable dif-
ferences in global F-actin dynamics when compared with the wild
type.GlobalF-actindynamicswasquantiﬁedfromtime-lapsemovie
sequences obtained from a spinning-disc confocal microscope
usingthemetricsofpixeldifferenceandcorrelationvaluesdeveloped
earlier (Vidali et al., 2010). For this type of analysis, we focused our
imaging on cortical F-actin in root epidermal cells in the mature zone
and the center of growing root hairs because cells in these areas of
the root stayed within the same ﬁeld of view during the entire 1-min
time-lapse sequence (Supplemental Movie 3). Time-lapse data sets
from epidermal cells of the root transition or elongation zone were
signiﬁcantly displaced as the primary root grew in the medium and
therefore were not suitable for the global F-actin analysis described
here.Basedonchangesinpixeldifferenceandcorrelationcoefﬁcient
decay,therewerenodramaticdifferencesinglobalF-actindynamics
between the wild type and hlb1 (Supplemental Figure 6).
Cloning of the Gene Conferring the hlb1 Phenotype
Because attempts to identify the mutation responsible for the hlb1
phenotype by standard thermal asymmetric interlaced-PCR were
unsuccessful, we conducted map-based cloning to identify the
Figure 2. F-Actin of hlb1 Roots Is More Sensitive to LatB.
(A) Representative images of F-actin organization in the elongation zone of
the wild type and hlb1 expressing UBQ10pro:GFP-ABD2-GFP 2 d after
transplanting 3-d-old seedlings on media supplemented with the solvent
control solution or 50 nM LatB. Bar = 20 mm.
(B) Quantitative analysis of F-actin density (occupancy) in epidermal cells
from the root elongation zone. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by
one way ANOVA. Means (n > 50 cells) 6 SE. Different letters are signiﬁcantly
different (P < 0.05, Tukey’s test).
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
749

HLB1gene.WefoundthattheAT5G41950genehada2-bpdeletion
in the ﬁrst exon corresponding to amino acid 63 in the hlb1 mutant
(Arabidopsis Chromosome 5 Positions 16786010 and 16786011).
This frameshift mutation resulted in a premature stop codon at
amino acid 67, which may possibly lead to a truncated protein
(Supplemental Figure 7A). To conﬁrm whether loss of
AT5G41950 corresponds to hlb1, we searched the publicly
available SALK collection for T-DNA insertions in the
AT5G41950 gene (Alonso et al., 2003). We genotyped the
segregating progeny by PCR and identiﬁed homozygous plants
for three SALK lines (SALK_046760, SALK_144501, and
SALK_065836), which had insertions in the 8th exon, the 7th
intron, and the 10th intron of AT5G41950, respectively
(Supplemental Figure 7B). Seedlings of these three T-DNA in-
sertion mutants exhibited similar hypersensitivity to LatB and
root hair growth defects as hlb1, indicating that these were
mutant alleles of hlb1 (Supplemental Figures 7C and 7D). The
original hlb1 mutant was designated as hlb1-1, whereas
SALK_046760, SALK_144501, and SALK_065836 were named
hlb1-2, hlb1-3, and hlb1-4, respectively (Supplemental Figure
7B). The average primary root length was signiﬁcantly less than
that of the wild type only in hlb1-2, which had an insertion in an
exon, suggesting that hlb1-3 and hlb1-4 are weaker alleles
(Supplemental Figure 7D). The hlb1-1 mutant allele was used for
the analyses detailed below. Further evidence showing that hlb1
is linked to AT5G41950 was obtained from functional comple-
mentation of hlb1 by expression of an HLB1-GFP fusion protein
that restored the wild-type phenotype (see below).
HLB1 Is a Tetratricopeptide Repeat-Containing Protein
Encoded by a Single Arabidopsis Gene
HLB1 encodes a 565-amino acid protein of unknown function
(Figure 5A). We analyzed 141 HLB1 homologs from 79 plant
species to understand their phylogenetic relationship. Phylo-
genetic relationships were inferred by the maximum likelihood
method (Le and Gascuel, 2008) using MEGA6 software (Tamura
et al., 2013). Based on this analysis, HLB1 appears to be well
conserved across the land plant lineage (Supplemental Figure
8). Sequence alignment of HLB1 homologs from six plant
species representing moss, monocots, and eudicots showed
that HLB1 has a highly variable N terminus, six tetratricopeptide
repeat (TPR) motifs, and a well conserved C terminus predicted
to form a helical structure. The conservation of amino acids at
the C terminus of several plant HLB1 proteins suggests that
HLB1 has functional domains that have yet to be characterized
(Figure 5B).
Including HLB1, the Arabidopsis genome has 147 proteins
containing a total of 839 TPR motifs that are predicted to function in
arangeofbiologicalprocessesandlocalizetoavarietyofsubcellular
compartments (Supplemental Data Set 1). However, HLB1 has no
paralogs among any of the 146 TPR motif-containing Arabidopsis
proteins,indicatingthatitexistsasasinglegene.Furthermore,HLB1
is speciﬁc to land plants, as no homologous sequences were
identiﬁedinfungiandanimals.TPRdomainsmediateprotein-protein
interactions, and proteins containing these domains are part of
protein complexes with diverse functions including transcriptional
repression, protein import, heat shock, and cell cycle regulation
(Blatch and Lässle, 1999; D’Andrea and Regan, 2003). TPR domain-
containing proteins in plants have been implicated in responses to
varioushormones,assemblyofthephotosyntheticmachinery,plastid
partitioning, and root development (Jacobsen et al., 1996; Rosado
et al., 2006; Yang et al., 2011; Hu et al., 2014; Bhuiyan et al., 2015).
Figure 3. Primary Roots and Root Hairs of hlb1 Are Shorter Than the Wild
Type in the Absence of LatB.
(A) Seven-day-old wild-type and hlb1 seedlings grown vertically on LatB-
free growth medium. Bar = 5 mm.
(B)Quantiﬁcationofprimaryrootlengthat3,5,and7dafterplantingonLatB-
free medium.Valuesare means(n= 50to65roots) 6 SE(t test, ***P< 0.0001).
(C) and (D) Low magniﬁcation images of wild-type (C) and hlb1 (D)
seedlings grown on LatB-free medium showing multiple root hairs. Note
the shorter root hairs of hlb1 compared with the wild type. Bar = 100 mm.
(E) Average root hair length of wild-type and hlb1 seedlings. Values are
means (n = 86 to 120 root hairs) 6 SE (t test, ***P < 0.0001).
(F) DIC images of single root hairs from 5-d-old seedlings of the wild type
and hlb1 grown on LatB-free medium. Bar = 20 mm.
750
The Plant Cell

HLB1 Colocalizes with TGN and EE Markers through Its
Conserved C-Terminal Domain
HLB1 fusions to GFP under the control of the native HLB1 pro-
moter (HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP) and the CaMV 35S promoter
(35Spro:GFP-HLB1) were generated to gain more insight into
HLB1 function. Both HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP and 35Spro:GFP-
HLB1 complemented the LatB-hypersensitive and root hair
phenotypes of hlb1-1 in young seedlings, indicating that the HLB1
ﬂuorescent protein fusions are functional (Figures 6A and 6B;
Supplemental Figure 9).
Confocal microscopy of cells from the elongation zone and root
hairs of hlb1-1 seedlings expressing HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP re-
vealed that the fusion protein localized to the cytoplasm and
decorated distinct and dynamic foci (Figures 6C and 6D;
Supplemental Movie 4). The ﬂuorescent bodies decorated by
HLB1-GFP were reminiscent of those observed in plant cells
expressing ﬂuorescently tagged compartments of the endomem-
brane system (Geldner et al., 2009). Endomembrane compartments
such as endosomes visualized with GFP have been shown to form
large intracellular ﬂuorescent agglomerates when treated with the
fungal metabolite Brefeldin A (BFA) (Robinson et al., 2008). Con-
sistent with the hypothesis that the HLB1-GFP bodies were asso-
ciated with the endomembrane system, seedlings expressing
HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP treated with 50 mM BFA for 1 h developed
intracellular ﬂuorescent agglomerates (Figures 6E and 6F).
To determine the identity of the endomembrane compartment
with which HLB1 is associated, HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP lines were
crossed with a set of marker lines expressing mCherry and CFP
endomembrane markers (Nelson et al., 2007; Geldner et al., 2009).
HLB1-GFP overlapped substantially with the TGN markers
mCherry-VTI12 and SYP61-CFP and an early/recycling endosomal
marker,mCherry-RabA1g(Figures7Ato7D;SupplementalMovies5
and 6), but not with the Golgi marker Man49-mCherry. Although the
bodies decorated by HLB1-GFP and Man49-mCherry were clearly
distinct, many HLB1-GFP bodies were adjacent to the larger Golgi
bodies and often moved alongside Golgi stacks, a feature typical of
TGN dynamics (Supplemental Movie 7) (Uemura et al., 2014). A
number of HLB1-GFP bodies were also observed to move in-
dependently of Man49-mCherry (Supplemental Movie 7). HLB1-
GFP did not overlap substantially with mCherry-ARA6, a marker for
the late endosomes/prevacuolar compartment (PVC) (Figure 7E;
Supplemental Movie 8). The extent of colocalization of HLB1-GFP
with selected endomembrane markers was quantiﬁed by extracting
Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients from scatterplots of green-red
imagepairs(Mandersetal.,1993;Costesetal.,2004;Bottanellietal.,
2012) (Figure 7F). The Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient was higher in
the HLB1-GFP-mCherry-VTI12 pair when compared with the HLB1-
GFP-mCherry-RabA1g pair. The higher value for the HLB1-GFP-
mCherry-VTI12 pair indicates that HLB1 foci are associated more
closely with the VTI12-resident TGN/EE population and to a lesser
extent with recycling endosomes decorated by RabA1g (Figure 7G).
Lower Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients were obtained from the
HLB1-GFP-mCherry-ARA6 pair, consistent with visual observations
of minimal overlap between HLB1 and late endosomes/PVC (Figures
7E and 7G; Supplemental Movie 8). Together, these data strongly
support the conclusion that HLB1 is a TGN/EE-localized protein.
As noted above, HLB1 contains six TPR motifs and a conserved
C-terminal domain of unknown function. To determine whether
these domains target HLB1 to the TGN/EE, we generated GFP
fusions to truncated HLB1 where either the six TPR motifs (GFP-
HLB1ΔTPR) or the conserved C terminus (GFP-HLB1ΔCTD) was
deleted (Supplemental Figure 10A). When expressed in seedlings,
the GFP-HLB1ΔCTD fusion that had the intact TPR motifs localized
exclusively to the cytoplasm. Bycontrast, the GFP-HLB1ΔTPR with
the conserved C terminus localized to both the cytoplasm and
TGN/EE bodies, similar to the localization of full-length HLB1
(SupplementalFigure10B).Takentogether,thedataindicatethatthe
C terminus of HLB1 is responsible for its localization to the TGN/EE.
Figure 4. Apical F-Actin Organization Is Disrupted in hlb1 Root Hairs.
(A) Fine, dynamic mesh works of F-actin at the extreme tip or subapical
region of wild-type root hairs (arrows) expressing UBQ10pro:GFP-ABD2-
GFP. The ﬁne apical mesh works of F-actin is often absent or occasionally
dissipatesinhlb1roothairs.SeeSupplementalMovie1foracorresponding
time-lapse sequence. Bar = 20 mm.
(B) F-actin labeled using UBQ10pro:Lifeact-mGFP in root hair tips of the
wild-type and hlb1 backgrounds. Filamentous structures are distinct in the
apex of wild-type root hairs (arrow). F-actin dynamics in growing root hairs
was quantiﬁed by obtaining the total time where the apical F-actin gradient
was visible (arrow) divided by 180 s (total elapsed time of the video) to
obtain the average ratio values shown in (C).
(C) Quantiﬁcation of tip F-actin dynamics in growing wild-type and hlb1
root hairs. Means (n = 28 to 42 root hairs) 6 SE (t test, **P < 0.001).
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
751

Figure 5. HLB1 Domain Structure and Amino Acid Sequence Alignment with Homologs from Selected Land Plants.
(A) Full-length HLB1 domain structure showing the position of six TPR motifs and C-terminal conserved domain (CTD).
(B) Alignment of Arabidopsis HLB1 with HLB1 homologs from the ﬁve selected model species: Medicago truncatula, Populus trichocarpa, Oryza sativa,
Brachypodium distachyon, and Physcomitrella patens. Dark-green shading depicts identical amino acid residues. Light green indicates other conserved
residues.
752
The Plant Cell

HLB1-GFP Bodies Track along F-Actin in Planta
Given that the hlb1 mutant is hypersensitive to LatB, we tested the
association of HLB1-GFP TGNs with F-actin in planta. HLB1-GFP
plants were crossed with plants expressing the red ﬂuorescent
F-actin construct UBQ10pro:mCherry-ABD2-mCherry (Dyachok
et al., 2014). It was difﬁcult to obtain clear images of mCherry-
ABD2-mCherry and HLB1-GFP bodies together in root cells that
were highly cytoplasmic because the HLB1-GFP cytoplasmic
component would often obscure the red F-actin label. Thus,
imaging of mCherry-ABD2-mCherry and HLB1-GFP was con-
ducted on vacuolated epidermal cells of the root maturation zone
and fully mature root hairs, where signal from the cytoplasm was
minimal. In these cell types, HLB1-GFP bodies aligned with and
tracked along F-actin bundles in a “beads-on-a-string”-like lo-
calization, typical of actin membrane adaptors such as the NET
proteins, which are associated with the actin cytoskeleton in vivo
(Figures 8A and 8B; Supplemental Movies 9 and 10) (Wang et al.,
2014).
The increased sensitivity of hlb1 to LatB prompted us to ask
whether the HLB1-GFP bodies themselves responded to LatB
treatment. We found that roots of seedlings formed intracellular
HLB1-GFP agglomerates within 10 min of LatB application.
However, other TGN markers, including YFP-VTI12 and SYP61-
CFP, formed similar aggregates as HLB1-GFP after LatB treat-
ment, indicating that the compound has a global effect on TGN
distribution in root cells (Supplemental Figure 11).
The Rice Ortholog of Arabidopsis HLB1 Partially
Complements hlb1
Bioinformatic analyses indicated that HLB1 is a highly conserved
protein that did not diverge much during the split between
eudicots and monocots (Supplemental Figure 8). To test whether
an HLB1 ortholog from a monocot could have similar functions
as the Arabidopsis HLB1, the rice (Oryza sativa) HLB1 gene
(Os-HLB1) was cloned and a 35Spro:OsHLB1-GFP construct was
generated. The OsHLB1-GFP fusion partially complemented the
LatB-hypersensitive phenotype of Arabidopsis hlb1 but fully
complemented its short primary root defects. Furthermore,
OsHLB1-GFP localized to the cytoplasm and labeled similar
dynamic punctate bodies as the Arabidopsis HLB1-GFP in the
hlb1-1 mutant background (Supplemental Figures 12A and 12B).
The partial complementation of hlb1 by OsHLB1-GFP and similar
localization patterns as the Arabidopsis HLB1 supports the
conclusion that the role of HLB1 in endomembrane trafﬁc is likely
conserved in land plants.
Coimmunoprecipitation Identiﬁes HOPM INTERACTOR7/
BREFELDIN A-VISUALIZED ENDOCYTIC TRAFFICKING
DEFECTIVE1 as a Potential HLB1 Interactor
Because TPR domains are known to mediate protein-protein
interactions (D’Andrea and Regan, 2003), coimmunoprecipitation
(co-IP) experiments were performed to identify proteins inter-
acting with HLB1 using roots of hlb1-1 seedlings complemented
with the 35Spro:GFP-HLB1 construct (Supplemental Figure 9).
Seedlings expressing 35Spro:GFP served as control plants. GFP-
HLB1 and its putative interactors were coimmunoprecipitated
using anti-GFP serum. Coimmunoprecipitated proteins from
35Spro:GFP-HLB1 and 35Spro:GFP seedlings were analyzed
with SDS-PAGE, and the components were identiﬁed by mass
spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. Peptides corresponding
to both HLB1 and GFP were readily detected in the coimmuno-
precipitates from the roots of the 35Spro:GFP-HLB1 line, in-
dicating successful isolation of chimeric GFP-HLB1 from the root
extracts (Figure 9A; Supplemental Data Set 2).
Two independent co-IP experiments were conducted, and
proteins present in 35Spro:GFP-HLB1 immunoprecipitates but
not in 35Spro:GFP controls were considered for further analyses.
Figure 6. A Functional HLB1-GFP Fusion Localizes to Endomembranes.
(A) and (B) HLBpro:HLB1-GFP complements the hypersensitivity to LatB
andshortroothairphenotypesofhlb1-1.Bars=5mmin(A)and200mmin(B).
(C) and (D) HLB1-GFP decorates distinct ﬂuorescent bodies (arrowheads)
in the root elongation zone and growing root hairs. See Supplemental
Movie 4 for a corresponding time-lapse sequence.
(E) and (F) HLB1-GFP in the root elongation zone and root hairs form
intracellular agglomerates (arrows) upon treatment with 50 mM BFA. Bars =
20 mm.
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
753

Figure 7. HLB1-GFP Colocalizes with Trans-Golgi Network and Early/Recycling Endosome Markers.
(A) and (B) Peripheral root cap (A) and epidermal cells in the root elongation zone (B) coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-VTI12, a TGN marker. Arrows
indicate where HLB1-GFP and mCherry-VTI12 overlap. See Supplemental Movie 5 for a corresponding time-lapse sequence.
(C) Epidermal cells in the root elongation zone coexpressing HLB1-GFP and SYP61-CFP, another TGN marker. Arrows indicate where HLB1-GFP and
SYP61-CFP overlap.
(D) Peripheral root cap cells coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-RabA1g, an early/recycling endosome marker. Arrows indicate where HLB1-GFP and
mCherry- RabA1g overlap. See Supplemental Movie 6 for a corresponding time-lapse sequence.
(E) Peripheral root cap cells coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-ARA6, a late endosome/PVC marker. Note that HLB1-GFP (arrows) and mCherry-ARA6
(arrowheads) do not overlap. See Supplemental Movie 8 for a corresponding time-lapse sequence. Bars = 5 mm in (A) to (E).
754
The Plant Cell

Surprisingly, the ﬁrst co-IP experiment yielded a limited number of
proteins with only 22 proteins unique to 35Spro:GFP-HLB1. By
contrast, the second co-IP experiment yielded ;650 proteins
unique to 35Spro:GFP-HLB1. It is unclear why there was a large
discrepancy in the protein list between two independent co-IP
experiments. In both co-IP experiments, however, peptides of
HOPM INTERACTOR7/BREFELDIN A-VISUALIZED ENDOCYTIC
TRAFFICKING DEFECTIVE1 (MIN7/BEN1) were detected as
unique to 35Spro:GFP-HLB1 root extracts (Nomura et al., 2006;
Tanaka et al., 2009). To validate the results of the two co-IP
experiments, a reciprocal co-IP was conducted with root ex-
tracts of 35Spro:MIN7/BEN1-GFP (Nomura et al., 2011). Consis-
tent with the possibility that MIN7/BEN1 interacts with HLB1,
HLB1 peptides were identiﬁed in the immunoprecipitates of
35Spro:MIN7/BEN1-GFP but not in the 35Spro:GFP controls
(Figure 9A).
MIN7/BEN1 has been previously shown to localize to the TGN/
EE and function in endocytosis of PM proteins (Tanaka et al.,
2009; Nomura et al., 2011; Tanaka et al., 2013). Therefore, its
connection to HLB1 was evaluated in more detail. Genetic and
pharmacological evidence that MIN7/BEN1 is biologically rele-
vant to HLB1 function was obtained from analyses of min7/ben1
mutants (SALK_013761), which we refer to here as ben1 for
simplicity. Roots of the ben1 mutant were hypersensitive to LatB,
asmuchashlb1(Figure9B).EvenintheabsenceofLatB,ben1had
short primary roots and root hairs, mirroring hlb1 phenotypes
(Figure 9C; Supplemental Figure 13). To determine if HLB1 and
MIN7/BEN1 colocalized in planta, we generated an HLB1-
mCherry fusion and expressed it in plants harboring MIN7/BEN1-
GFP (Nomura et al., 2011). Spinning-disc confocal microscopy
observations followed by quantitative colocalization analyses
revealed that HLB1-mCherry bodies overlapped signiﬁcantly with
MIN7/BEN1-GFP foci, providing support to our co-IP results that
the two proteins indeed interact in vivo (Figures 9D and 9E;
Supplemental Movie 11).
The ben1 and hlb1 Mutations Affect Distinct Membrane
Trafﬁcking Pathways
A mutant allele of ben1 was isolated from a confocal microscopy-
based forward-genetic screen for defects in the internalization
of the PIN-FORMED (PIN) PM-localized auxin efﬂux carriers.
ben1 was found to be defective in endocytic trafﬁcking as it had
diminished ability to form PIN-GFP agglomerates when treated
with BFA (Tanaka et al., 2009, 2013). Because ben1 mirrored
the LatB hypersensitivity and root hair phenotypes of hlb1
(Figure 9), we hypothesized that hlb1 could also have defects in
the formation of intracellular PIN agglomerates when exposed
to BFA. PIN2-GFP was therefore expressed in hlb1 and treated
with BFA. Like wild-type roots, hlb1 roots accumulated in-
tracellular PIN2-GFP agglomerates after 1 h exposure to 50 mM
BFA (Figure 10A). Although the number of PIN2-GFP ag-
glomerates per cell in hlb1 and the wild type was not statis-
tically different, ﬂuorescence of BFA-induced agglomerates
was more intense in hlb1 compared with the wild type when
imaged under similar confocal microscopy settings (Figures
10B and 10C). The stronger ﬂuorescence intensity of PIN2-
GFP agglomerates in hlb1 prompted us to ask whether the hlb1
Figure 7. (continued).
(F) A representative scatterplot for quantiﬁcation of the extent of colocalization between green- and red-emitting organelles. The scatterplot for colocalization
was obtained from an individual cell as indicated by the white rectangle in (A).
(G) Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients were calculated from scatterplots using Volocity quantitation software. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by
one-way ANOVA. Means (n > 170 cells) 6 SE. Different letters are signiﬁcantly different (P < 0.05, Tukey’s test).
Figure 8. HLB1-GFP Tracks along F-Actin Cables in Living Cells.
Root epidermal cell from the maturation zone (A) and the base of a mature
root hair (B) coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-ABD2-mCherry (mCh-
ABD2-mCh), an F-actin marker. Arrows indicate individual or clusters of
HLB1-GFP bodies aligned along the red-emitting F-actin cables. See
Supplemental Movies 9 and 10 for corresponding time-lapse sequences.
Bars = 10 mm.
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
755

mutation might be affecting the recycling of PIN2-GFP to the
PM. To address this question, BFA washout experiments were
conducted on wild-type and hlb1 seedlings expressing PIN2-
GFP. After 1 to 2 h of BFA washout, the number of PIN2-GFP
agglomerates in wild-type roots decreased signiﬁcantly,
whereas those in the hlb1 mutant background persisted
(Figures 10A and 10C).
The PIN2 trafﬁcking phenotypes observed in hlb1 were sur-
prisingly opposite to those reported for ben1 but strikingly similar
to those described for a class of dominant membrane trafﬁcking
mutants called bex (for bfa-visualized exocytic trafﬁcking de-
fective) (Feraru et al., 2012; Tanaka et al., 2014). In addition to the
persistence of PIN agglomerates after BFA washout, bex1 and
bex5 mutants formed intracellular PIN2-GFP agglomerates in
response to low (10 mM) concentrations of BFA, whereas the wild
type showed only minor agglomerate formation (Feraru et al.,
2012; Tanaka et al., 2014). hlb1 seedlings expressing PIN2-GFP
were therefore treated with 10 mM BFA for 1 and 3 h to determine if
hlb1 trafﬁckingdefects mirroredthose reported forbex1 andbex5.
Consistent with previous studies, 10 mM BFA induced only minor
intracellular accumulation of PIN2-GFP in wild-type seedlings
(Figure 10D).By contrast, hlb1 roots exposed to 10mM BFAfor the
sametimeperiodsasthewildtypeshowedsigniﬁcantformationof
PIN2-GFP agglomerates that were reminiscent of the bex mutants
(Figures 10D and 10E) (Feraru et al., 2012; Tanaka et al., 2014).
Taken together, the data indicate that HLB1 functions in protein
recycling to the PM.
Recycling of PIN2-GFP to the Plasma Membrane in hlb1 Is
Hypersensitive to LatB
Because hlb1 is hypersensitive to LatB and the actin cytoskeleton
has been implicated in the intracellular trafﬁcking of PIN proteins
(Geldner et al., 2001; Nagawa et al., 2012), we hypothesized that
PIN2-GFP recycling in the hlb1 background could also exhibit
heightened sensitivity to concentrations of LatB that only
Figure 9. MIN7/BEN1 Interacts with HLB1 and ben1 Phenocopies the Hypersensitivity to LatB and Root Hair Phenotypes of hlb1.
(A) Heat map of twoindependent co-IP experiments from roots of the GFP-only control and GFP-HLB1 seedlings indicating relative abundance of peptides.
GFP peptides were detected in all the samples. HLB1 and MIN7/BEN1 peptides were detected in the respective GFP-HLB1 and MIN7/BEN1-GFP samples,
but not in the GFP-only controls (a value of 0 indicates absence of peptide). Note that HLB1 and MIN7/BEN1 were pulled down, reciprocally.
(B) Hypersensitivity of ben1 and hlb1 to LatB. Three-day-old seedlings were transplanted onto 50 nM LatB and the image was taken 6 d later. Bar = 5 mm.
(C) Representative bright-ﬁeld images of wild-type, hlb1, and ben1 root hairs from seedlings without LatB treatment. Bar = 20 mm.
(D) MIN7/BEN1-GFP and HLB1-mCherry colocalize (arrows) in common TGN/EE compartments in root peripheral cap cells. Bar = 10 mm.
(E) Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients were similar between MIN7/BEN1-GFP and HLB1-mCherry and HLB1-GFP and mCherry-VTI12 (t test; n.s., not
signiﬁcant).
756
The Plant Cell

Figure 10. hlb1 Is Defective in Recycling of PIN2-GFP to the Plasma Membrane.
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
757

minimally affected PIN2-GFP recycling in the wild type. To test this
hypothesis,thewildtypeandhlb1expressingPIN2-GFPweretreated
with50 nMLatB. AtthisLatBconcentration,PIN2-GFP inrootsofthe
wild type formed a few, weakly ﬂuorescing intracellular PIN2-GFP
agglomerates within 1 h of exposure to the drug. On the other hand,
roots of hlb1 seedlings formed bright and numerous PIN2-GFP in-
tracellular agglomerates that were reminiscent of BFA-induced
PIN2-GFPbodies(Figures10Fto10H).Theseresultsindicatethatthe
recycling of PIN2-GFP to the PM in hlb1 is more sensitive to LatB
compared with the wild type and consistent with the heightened
response of its roots and F-actin structures to the chemical.
hlb1 Exhibits Enhanced Accumulation of PIN2-GFP at the
PM and Endosomes but Has No Measurable Defects in TGN
and MIN1/BEN1 Dynamics
We next asked if the localization of PIN2-GFP was altered in hlb1
rootcellswithoutBFAorLatBtreatment. Live-cellmicroscopy and
corresponding quantitative analyses showed that PIN2-GFP
signal in the hlb1 background was higher in the PM and in the cell
interior compared with the wild type when imaged with similar
confocal microscopy settings. The stronger ﬂuorescence in the
cell interior of hlb1 root cells was due to brighter and more distinct
PIN2-GFP foci (Figures 11A and 11B).
The more intense PIN2-GFP signals in the PM and cell interior of
hlb1 roots was reminiscent of observations made in bex5, which
showed similar PIN2-GFP recycling defects as hlb1 (Feraru et al.,
2012). Given the defects in PIN2-GFP recycling in hlb1, we asked
whether the distribution of a TGN/EE marker was altered in the
mutant. To address this question, we expressed YFP-VTI12 in the
hlb1 background. The distribution of YFP-VTI12 foci in peripheral
root cap cells was similar in the wild type and hlb1 (Supplemental
Figure14A).Furthermore,globalanalysesofYFP-VTI12dynamicsin
roothairsrevealed no appreciable differences between the wild type
and hlb1 (Supplemental Figures 14B and 14C and Supplemental
Movie 12). Because we established that MIN7/BEN1 is an HLB1
interactor at the TGN/EE, we also looked at the distribution of MIN7/
BEN1-GFP in the hlb1 background. Unfortunately, lines expressing
MIN7/BEN1-GFPinhlb1andthewildtypewereextensivelysilenced
and we could observe GFP signal only from cells in the peripheral
root cap. Like YFP-VTI12, the distribution of MIN7/BEN1-GFP in
thesecellswassimilarbetweenthewildtypeandhlb1(Supplemental
Figure 14D). Although we did not detect any substantial differences
between the wild type and hlb1 with regard to VTI12 or MIN7/BEN1
distribution at the light microscope level, we cannot discount the
possibility that TGN/EE ultrastructure might be affected in the hlb1
mutant as has been reported in bex5 (Feraru et al., 2012).
Because conspicuous differences between the wild type and
hlb1 were noted with regard to PIN2-GFP intensity in the PM and
cell interior (Figures 11A and 11B), we next asked if hlb1 displayed
any pin2-like phenotypes in regard to seedling root development.
Consistent with previous reports, pin2 seedlings had distinct root
agravitropic defects as evident from their high deviation from
vertical growth (Müller et al., 1998). By contrast, the deviation from
vertical growth of hlb1 roots was similar to the wild type
(Supplemental Figures 15A and 15B). Moreover, although the
deviation from vertical growth of pin2 roots appeared to be en-
hanced by LatB, their primary roots exhibited wild-type growth
sensitivity to LatB (Supplemental Figures 15C and 15D). Root
deviationfromverticalgrowthofben1andhlb1ben1wassimilarto
hlb1 and the wild type(Supplemental Figures 15A and 15B). These
data indicate that the HLB1-MIN7/BEN1-resident TGNcomplex is
not required for full functionality of PIN2.
Because PIN2 recycling is defective in hlb1 and post-Golgi
trafﬁc of some PIN proteins is a crucial component of the root
gravitropic response (Kleine-Vehn et al., 2008; Kleine-Vehn et al.,
2010), we next asked whether hlb1 roots were compromised in
gravitropism. Seedlings of the wild type and hlb1 with roots
growing vertically were rotated by 90 degrees, and the kinetics of
root curvature was monitored at various time points for a 12-h
period. No measureable differences in root gravitropic response
between wild-type and hlb1 seedlings under our growth con-
ditions were noted (Supplemental Figures 15E and 15F).
hlb1 Has Partial Defects in Bulk Flow Secretion and
Trafﬁcking to the Vacuole
The impaired trafﬁcking of PIN2-GFP to the PM in hlb1 could be
due to defects in protein secretion or recycling. We therefore
Figure 10. (continued).
(A)One-hourtreatmentwithBFAresultsintheformationofintracellularPIN2-GFPagglomeratesinboththewildtypeandhlb1.Two-hourwashoutofBFAled
to a signiﬁcant reduction in the number of PIN2-GFP agglomerates in the wild type but not in hlb1. Bar = 20 mm.
(B) Relative ﬂuorescence intensity of PIN2-GFP agglomerates inroot cells of the wild type andhlb1 treated withBFA for1 h.Values are means (n = 200 to276
PIN2-GFP bodies) 6 SE from >120 cells from at least 15 seedlings (t test, **P < 0.001).
(C)QuantiﬁcationofPIN2-GFPagglomeratesafter1hBFAtreatmentandafter1hofBFAwashout.Valuesaremeans(n=70to171cells)6 SEfromatleast20
seedlings. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA. Different letters indicate signiﬁcant differences among means (P < 0.05; Tukey’s
test).
(D) hlb1 forms more PIN2-GFP agglomerates in response to low (10 mM) BFA than the wild type after 1 and 3 h. Bar = 20 mm.
(E) Quantiﬁcation of PIN2-GFP agglomerates at 1 and 3 h treatment with 10 mM BFA. Values are means (n = 125 to 170 cells) 6 SE from at least 15 seedlings.
Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA. Different letters indicate signiﬁcant differences among means (P < 0.05; Tukey’s test).
(F) One-hour treatment with 50 nM LatB results in more signiﬁcant accumulation of PIN2-GFP agglomerates in hlb1 compared with the wild type. Bar =
20 mm.
(G)Relativeﬂuorescence intensityofPIN2-GFPagglomeratesinrootcellsofthewild typeandhlb1treatedwithLatBfor1h.Values aremeans(n=104to898
PIN2-GFP bodies) 6 SE from >300 root cortical cells and at least 15 independent seedlings (t test, **P < 0.001).
(H) Quantiﬁcation of the number of PIN2-GFP agglomerates in root cells of the wild type and hlb1 after treatment with LatB for 1 h. Values are means (n = 341
root cortical cells) 6 SE from at least 15 independent seedlings (t test, ***P < 0.0001).
758
The Plant Cell

expressed the secreted (SEC)-RFP fusion, a bulk-ﬂow secretion
reporter, in hlb1 (Faso et al., 2009; Renna et al., 2013) to determine
whether the mutant has defects in constitutive secretion mech-
anisms. We ﬁrst examined SEC-RFP in actively elongating root
hairs because the tips of these cell types are characterized by
active secretion(Preuss etal., 2004), andthe mostobvious growth
and F-actin organizational defects of hlb1 seedlings were ob-
servedinroot hairs(Figures3and4).Using spinning-discconfocal
microscopy, we found that growing root hairs of the wild type had
intense SEC-RFP ﬂuorescence at the extreme tip. By contrast,
most hlb1 root hairs had weak SEC-RFP ﬂuorescence at the tip or
failed to maintain a distinct tip-focused SEC-RFP gradient (Figure
11C; Supplemental Movie 13). The tip-focused SEC-RFP gradient
was quantiﬁed by obtaining the ratio of the average SEC-RFP
ﬂuorescence atthe tipapex tothe average SEC-RFP ﬂuorescence
at the subapex from 1-min time-lapse movie sequences (Figure
11D). We found that ratio values at every 10-s time point were
higher in the wild type compared with hlb1, verifying our visual
Figure 11. PIN2-GFP Distribution, Constitutive Secretion, and Trafﬁc to the Vacuole Are Partially Disrupted in hlb1.
(A) Representative images of non-LatB-treated root cells expressing PIN2-GFP. Bar = 10 mm.
(B) Quantitative analysis of PIN2-GFP ﬂuorescence in the PM (arrows) and cell interior (white rectangle). Mean ﬂuorescence intensity was obtained from at
least 20 roots 6 SE (t test, ***P < 0.0001).
(C) Representative images of non-LatB-treated root hairs expressing SEC-RFP. Note the intense SEC-RFP signal at the extreme root hair tip of wild type
(arrow). See Supplemental Movie 13 for a corresponding time-lapse sequence. Bar = 10 mm.
(D) Root hair tip secretion was quantiﬁed by dividing average ﬂuorescence intensity at the apex by average ﬂuorescence intensity at the subapex as marked
by the white elliptical area to obtain ratio values shown in (E).
(E) Apex to subapex SEC-RFP ratio taken every 10 s for 1 min. A higher ratio indicates a stronger tip-focused SEC-RFP gradient. Values are means (n = 28 to
41 root hairs) 6 SE (t test, ***P < 0.0001).
(F) SEC-RFP in epidermal cells from cotyledons of 5-d-old seedlings. SEC-RFP is detected in the apoplast of the wild type and hlb1 but appears to be
retained strongly in the ER (arrows) in hlb1. Bars = 5 mm.
(G) RFP-AFVY accumulates in the vacuole (V) lumen of epidermal cells of wild-type and hlb1 hypocotyls. In hlb1, RFP-AFVY is mis-sorted to the apoplast
(Ap). Bar = 20 mm.
(H) Mis-sorting of RFP-AFVY was quantiﬁed by dividing the average ﬂuorescence intensity of the apoplast by the average ﬂuorescence intensity of the
vacuole as indicated by the white rectangles in (G). A higher ratio indicates strong RFP-AFVY accumulation in the apoplast. Values are means (n = 38 to
43 cells from 15 independent seedlings) 6 SE (t test, ***P < 0.0001).
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
759

observations that secretion in root hair tips of hlb1 is altered
(Figure 11E). Furthermore, retentionof SEC-RFPintheERappeared
to be more pronounced in hlb1 cotyledons compared with the wild
type (Figure 11F). However, like in the wild type, strong SEC-RFP
ﬂuorescencewasstillobservedintheapoplastofvariouscelltypesof
hlb1seedlings(Figure11F;SupplementalFigures16Ato16D).Taken
together, our results indicate that bulk ﬂow secretion in hlb1 is only
partiallyaffected,adefectthatismoststronglymanifestedingrowing
root hairs, which have measurable F-actin defects.
The localization of HLB1 to the TGN/EE suggests that other
post-Golgi trafﬁcking pathways such as trafﬁcking to the vacuole
might be affected in the hlb1 mutant. To address this question, we
expressed RFP-AFVY, a fusion to the C-terminal of phaseolin that
accumulates in the vacuole lumen (Hunter et al., 2007). Because
RFP-AFVY was strongly silenced in root cells, we focused our
analysesonhypocotylsandcotyledons.WefoundthatRFP-AFVY
in hypocotyl and cotyledon epidermal cells of hlb1 seedlings
appeared to be mis-sorted to the apoplast (Figure 11G). Mis-
sorting of RFP-AFVY was quantiﬁed by obtaining the ratio of
ﬂuorescence from a ﬁxed region of the apoplast to an equivalent
area within the vacuole lumen in epidermal cells of the hypocotyl
(Figure 11G). The higher ratio values for hlb1 compared with the
wild type support that RFP-AFVY is mis-sorted in the mutant
(Figure11H).However,RFP-AFVYstillaccumulatedinthevacuole
lumen of several cell types in hlb1 similar to the wild type, in-
dicating that vacuolar targeting defects in the mutant are only
partial (Figure 11G).
Other evidence showing that trafﬁcking to the vacuole in hlb1
is not completely compromised was obtained from incubating
wild-type and hlb1 seedlings expressing PIN2-GFP in the dark
for 12 h. Under such conditions, PIN2-GFP in the wild type was
shown to accumulate in lytic vacuoles (Feraru et al., 2012). Here,
we observed that both the wild type and hlb1 accumulated PIN2-
GFP in lytic vacuoles in the dark (Supplemental Figure 16E). In
addition, the styryl dye FM1-43 labeled the tonoplast in elon-
gating root cells of light-grown hlb1 seedlings, indicating that
trafﬁcking to the vacuole can still proceed in the mutant. FM1-43
labeling of root cells in the elongation zone and DIC microscopy
of peripheral root cap cells also did not reveal dramatic differ-
ences in vacuolar morphology between the wild type and hlb1
(Supplemental Figures 16F and 16G). However, the possibility
that there are subtle differences in vacuolar dynamics and
morphology between the wild type and hlb1 cannot be ruled out.
Furthermore, differences in vacuole morphology between the
wild type and hlb1 could be more apparent in other cell types or
ampliﬁed under certain growth conditions (e.g., light versus
dark).
Genetic Interaction Studies Indicate that hlb1 and ben1
Function in Common Root Developmental Pathways despite
Opposite Effects on Membrane Trafﬁcking
As noted above, it was previously shown that ben1 had reduced
intracellular accumulation of PIN-GFP following treatment with
50 mM BFA, a phenotype opposite to that of hlb1 (Tanaka et al.,
2009,2013).Theoppositetrafﬁckingphenotypesofben1andhlb1
were surprising given their similar root developmental phenotypes
and LatB hypersensitivity (Figure 9). To better understand the
genetic relationship between hlb1 and ben1, hlb1 ben1 double
mutants were generated and their phenotypes were compared
with hlb1 and ben1 single mutants. The extent of hypersensitivity
of hlb1 ben1 double mutants to LatB was similar to single hlb1 and
ben1 mutants (Supplemental Figure 13A). Furthermore, root hair
lengthofhlb1ben1intheabsenceofLatBwasslightlyshorterthan
hlb1 single mutants but similar to ben1 single mutants. In addition,
hlb1 ben1 had slightly shorter primary roots in LatB-free media
compared with hlb1 and ben1 single mutants (Supplemental
Figures 13B to 13D).
We next asked how trafﬁcking of PM markers is affected in hlb1
ben1 double mutants compared with hlb1 and ben1 single mu-
tants. For these assays, we used the endocytic styryl tracer dye
FM1-43.ConsistentwiththePIN2-GFPassays,FM1-43inthewild
type and hlb1 formed ﬂuorescent agglomerates after a 1-h
treatment with 50 mM BFA (Figures 12A and 12B). Also in
agreement with the PIN2-GFP assays was the observation that
FM1-43 agglomerates persisted in hlb1 compared with the wild
type after BFA washout (Supplemental Figure 17). By contrast,
ben1 had diminished accumulation of FM1-43 agglomerates after
BFA treatment, in agreement with previous reports (Figure 12C)
(Tanaka et al., 2009, 2013). In hlb1 ben1, FM1-43 accumulation
was diminished to a similar extent as ben1 single mutants (Figures
12D and 12E). The similar LatB-hypersensitive response and root
growth defects of hlb1 ben1 to single hlb1 and ben1 mutants
indicatethathlb1andben1functionincommongeneticpathways.
Because hlb1 ben1 trafﬁcking androot hair defects mirrored those
of the ben1 single mutant, ben1 likely functions upstream of hlb1.
Another phenotype reported for ben1 seedlings is their hy-
persensitivity to growth on moderate concentrations of BFA
(Tanaka et al., 2009). Given that both ben1 and hlb1 phenocopied
each other in regard to root development and hypersensitivity to
LatB, the response of hlb1 to BFA was examined. Consistent with
previous reports, ben1 seedlings displayed heightened sensitivity
tolowdosesofBFAcomparedwiththewildtype.Bycontrast,hlb1
seedlings showed wild-type sensitivity to BFA. Furthermore,
seedlings of the hlb1 ben1 double mutant displayed similar hy-
persensitivity to BFA compared to seedlings of ben1 single mu-
tants, providing additional genetic evidence that ben1 functions
upstream of hlb1 (Figures 12F and 12G).
DISCUSSION
The endomembrane system is essential for normal plant cell de-
velopment, yet many protein components that modulate its function
remain to be identiﬁed. The distinct effects of cytoskeleton-
disrupting chemicals on plant growth provide the basis for con-
venient forward-genetic screens to isolate mutants with altered
sensitivitytothesecompounds.However,suchscreenshaverarely
been applied for studies on the plant cytoskeleton despite their
strong potential to uncover mechanisms underlying the cytoskel-
etalbasisofplantdevelopment.Forward-geneticscreenstoisolate
mutants that respond differentially to cytoskeleton-disrupting
compoundshavebeenlimitedtothosethataltermicrotubules(Naoi
andHashimoto,2004;Paredezetal.,2008).Here,weusedaforward-
genetic approach with the potent actin-disrupting compound
LatB and identiﬁed the recessive mutant hlb1, which displayed
760
The Plant Cell

enhanced LatB sensitivity compared with the wild type. We de-
termined that HLB1 encodes a six TPR motif-containing protein
with a conserved C-terminal domain. We found that HLB1 is
a plant-speciﬁc protein that could potentially link the actin cyto-
skeleton with post-Golgi trafﬁc. Loss of function of HLB1 leads to
alterations in protein recycling to the PM and to an F-actin network
that is more susceptible to actin-speciﬁc chemical antagonists.
This, in turn, results in seedlings with root hair polarity defects and
reduced primary root growth. We demonstrated that HLB1 as-
sociates with the TGN/EE through its conserved C-terminal do-
main and functions with the TGN/EE-localized ARF-GEF protein
MIN7/BEN1 (Nomura et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2009) in over-
lapping endomembrane trafﬁcking pathways. These data provide
important insight into a previously undescribed component of the
endomembranetrafﬁckingmachinerythatishighlyconservedand
unique to land plants.
HLB1 Is a Component of the Plant Post-Golgi
Trafﬁcking Machinery
Ourworkexperimentallydemonstrates thataTPRdomainprotein,
namely, HLB1, is localized to post-Golgi compartments. Other
TPR domain-containing proteins among the 147 in Arabidopsis,
including SHORT AND SWOLLEN ROOT1 and MET1, localize to
mitochondria and chloroplasts, respectively, consistent with
their functions in oxidative stress-mediated root development
and in the assembly of the photosynthetic apparatus (Bhuiyan
et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). The TPR protein CLUMPED
CHLOROPLAST1 (CLMP1) localizes to distinct foci in the cy-
toplasm. Although the exact identity of the CLMP1 foci remains
unknown, their adjacent location to chloroplasts supports their
role in plastid partitioning and distribution (Yang et al., 2011).
Here,we showthattheTGN/EE-localized HLB1proteinfunctions
in the recycling of proteins and other lipophilic cargo from post-
Golgi compartments to the PM after their uptake by endocytosis.
This conclusion is supported by the observation that BFA-
induced PIN2-GFP and FM1-43 agglomerates persisted in hlb1
mutants after BFA washout.
hlb1 also had partial defects in constitutive secretion, which
weremostapparentincellsofyoungseedlingsincludingroothairs
and epidermal pavement cells of cotyledons. In this regard, LatB
treatment was previously shown to alter the tip localization of the
TGN-localized secretory marker YFP-RabA4B in growing root
hairs (Preuss et al., 2004). The disrupted gradient of F-actin
meshwork in hlb1 root hairs could explain the tip secretion and
root hair growth defects of the mutant. The mis-sorting of RFP-
AFVY to the apoplast of hlb1 is reminiscent of another post-Golgi
trafﬁcking mutant called unhinged-1, which is disrupted in a gene
encoding VASCULAR SORTING PROTEIN51 (Pahari et al., 2014).
Mis-sorting of RFP-AFVY was only partial as the marker still
accumulated to a large extent in the vacuole lumen of hlb1. The
RFP-AFVY assays were veriﬁed by observations that PIN2-GFP
accumulated in lytic vacuoles when incubated in the dark and that
FM1-43 decorated the tonoplast in hlb1. Future studies will de-
termine whether other markers of vacuolar targeting and mor-
phology are altered in hlb1.
In animals, some TPR domain proteins localize to the endo-
membrane system. For instance, the endosome-localized sorting
nexins SNX20 and SNX21 contain TPR motifs in addition to their
phox homology (PX) phosphoinositide binding domain. These
sorting nexins have been proposed to function as membrane-
associated scaffolding proteins that could potentially interact with
transmembrane ligands for transport through the endomembrane
system (Clairfeuille et al., 2015). In addition to the TPR motifs,
HLB1 contains a C-terminal domain that is highly conserved
among land plants. Protein domain prediction software indicates
that this C-terminal domain can form a helical structure and
manual annotation revealed that it had weak similarity (;15%) to
thepleckstrinhomology(PH)domainofArabidopsisPLECKSTRIN
HOMOLOG1.LikePXdomains,PHdomainsbindtophosphoinositides
andcouldfacilitate targeting ofproteins containingthese domains
Figure 12. HLB1 Acts Downstream of BEN1.
(A) to (D) Intracellular accumulation of the styryl dye FM 1-43 is altered in
ben1 and hlb1 ben1 but not in the wild type or hlb1. FM1-43 intracellular
agglomerates aftertreatmentwithBFAinben1andhlb1ben1arefewerand
have less intense ﬂuorescence than the wild type and hlb1. Bar = 20 mm.
(E) Quantiﬁcation of FM1-43 agglomerates in root cells after treatment with
BFA for 1 h. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA.
Values are means (n > 200 cells) 6 SE from at least 20 independent
seedlings. Different letters indicate signiﬁcant differences among means
(P < 0.05; Tukey’s test).
(F) Growth of ben1 and hlb1 ben1 seedlings is more sensitive to 5 mM BFA
compared with the wild type and hlb1. Bar = 5 mm.
(G) Quantiﬁcation ofprimary rootgrowth (expressed as percent of controls)
of the wild type, hlb1, ben1, and hlb1 ben1 in 5 mM BFA. Statistical sig-
niﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA. Values are means (n = 18 to
32 roots) 6 SE. Different letters indicate signiﬁcant differences among
means (P < 0.05; Tukey’s test).
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
761

to membranes (Boss and Im, 2012). Consistent with the possibility
that the C-terminal domain of HLB1 has similar functions to ca-
nonical PX or PH domains, we showed through GFP-HLB1 de-
letion constructs that HLB1 localized to TGN/EE compartments
primarily throughitsC-terminaldomain. Althoughdirect bindingof
theHLB1tolipidshasyettobedemonstrated,theroothairdefects
of hlb1 suggest that the HLB1 C-terminal domain could provide
a mechanism for integrating phosphoinositide signaling with
actin-mediated tip growth regulation. In this regard, phosphoi-
nositides have been implicated in actin-mediated root hair tip
growth (Vincent et al., 2005; Yoo et al., 2012) and mutants dis-
rupted in various steps of phosphoinositide metabolism have
altered root hair development (Kusano et al., 2008; Stenzel et al.,
2008; Thole et al., 2008) that mirrors the root hair phenotypes of
hlb1. One explanation for the root hair defects of the hlb1 mutant is
that HLB1 functions in recycling of phosphoinositide metabolizing
enzymes or phosphoinositides to the PM of the root hair apex.
Future studies will test this hypothesis using ﬂuorescently tagged
phosphoinositide reporters and enzymes.
The trafﬁcking defects of hlb1 were similar to the previously
characterized dominant bex1 and bex5 mutants (Feraru et al.,
2012; Tanaka et al., 2014). In this regard, we speculate that BEX1,
an ARF1A1C small GTPase, and BEX5, a RABA1b small GTPase,
could functionally converge onto similar trafﬁcking pathways
mediated by HLB1. It is important to note, however, that despite
the similarities in membrane trafﬁcking phenotypes of hlb1 to
those of the bex mutants, they differed in their seedling sensitivity
to BFA. Whereas bex1 and bex5 seedling growth was reported to
be hypersensitive to moderate BFA concentrations (Feraru et al.,
2012; Tanaka et al., 2014), hlb1 seedlings showed wild-type BFA
sensitivity. T-DNA knockout bex5 mutants did not show the
trafﬁcking defects characteristic of the dominant-negative bex5-1,
suggesting functional redundancy with other closely related
RABA1b GTPases (Feraru et al., 2012). In the future, it will be
interesting to test how bex loss-of-function mutants respond to
LatB and to determine whether ARF1A1C and RABA1b operate in
common exocytic trafﬁcking pathways as HLB1. Although HLB1
is encoded by a single Arabidopsis gene and the hlb1 mutant
showed clear defects in exocytosis and heightened sensitivity to
LatB, the mild root phenotypes of hlb1 in the absence of LatB
suggests that HLB1 could function redundantly with other un-
known nonhomologous proteins in plant development.
A signiﬁcant ﬁnding from our study is the identiﬁcation of MIN7/
BEN1, a TGN/EE-localized ARF-GEF protein belonging to the BIG
subfamily (Nomura et al., 2006; Tanaka et al., 2009), as an HLB1
interactor. Although the nature of the HLB1-MIN7/BEN1 in-
teraction at the biochemical level has yet to be established, results
presented here point to HLB1 and MIN7/BEN1 operating in
converging endomembrane trafﬁcking pathways. In addition to
the clear colocalization of HLB1 and MIN7/BEN1 in distinct TGN/
EE foci, double mutant studies demonstrate that ben1 is epistatic
to hlb1 with regard to LatB hypersensitivity, FM1-43 recycling,
root hair growth, and sensitivity to moderate concentrations of
BFA. Because the hlb1 ben1 double mutant most closely re-
sembles the phenotypes of the ben1 single mutant, MIN7/BEN1
likely functions upstream of HLB1. This observation reinforces the
conclusion that the hlb1 mutant is deﬁcient speciﬁcally in endo-
cyticmembranerecycling.Theepistaticeffectofben1onhlb1with
respect to the formation of FM1-43 BFA bodies suggests that in
hlb1, the pool of PM-derived cargo for TGN-regulated recycling
likely originates from endocytic uptake mediated by BEN1.
HLB1 Potentially Links Post-Golgi Trafﬁc to the Actin
Cytoskeleton in Plants
In addition to the root hair tip growth defects and strong hyper-
sensitivity of hlb1 seedlings to LatB, our results support the
possibility that HLB1 may exert its functions in endomembrane
trafﬁcthroughactin.Thisissupportedbyseverallinesofevidence.
First, confocal microscopy analyses showed that the HLB1-GFP
bodies tracked along F-actin bundles in vivo. HLB1-GFP locali-
zation was reminiscent of the “beads-on-a-string” pattern ex-
hibitedbytheNETfamily ofactinmembrane adaptors(Wang etal.,
2014). Second, the localization of the HLB1-GFP foci was rapidly
disrupted by low doses of LatB. Third, PIN2-GFP recycling to the
PM, which was only minimally affected by low doses of LatB in the
wild type, was severely inhibited in hlb1. The LatB-induced PIN2-
GFP agglomerates were strikingly similar to those induced by high
concentrations of BFA. Despite these results, we cannot discard
the possibility that the movement of HLB1-GFP punctae along
F-actin could simply reﬂect that HLB1 is on the TGN/EE surface,
which would not support speciﬁc functional linkage between actin
and HLB1. Furthermore, we have found that LatB also rapidly
affected the distribution of other TGN/EE markers in root cells,
indicating that the observed effects of the drug on HLB1 locali-
zation are not exclusive for this protein. Nonetheless, we showed
that actin dynamics in the tip of elongating root hairs are disrupted
in hlb1 in support of the notion that HLB1 could be linked to actin
function. The lack of differences in F-actin organization and dy-
namics in cells of the root elongation zone between non-LatB-
treated wild type and hlb1 does not preclude the possibility that
subtle differences in F-actin dynamics exist between the wild type
and hlb1, and such differences may manifest only at the level of
single actin ﬁlaments (Staiger et al., 2009). While a direct in-
teraction between HLB1 with actin awaits for experimental vali-
dation, our analyses support that HLB1 exerts a role in post-Golgi
membrane trafﬁc in relation to the actin cytoskeleton, which may
occur either directly or through interactions with actin modulators.
The involvement of the actin cytoskeleton in endocytosis and
protein recycling has been documented in plants using both
pharmacological and genetic approaches. For example, sterol
endocytosis was found to be disrupted in act2 mutants and by
treating wild-type plants with cytochalasin D (Grebe et al., 2003).
LatB and cytochalasin were also shown to inﬂuence the recycling
and polar localization of PIN proteins in root and leaf epidermal cells
(Geldneretal.,2001;Nagawaetal.,2012).Finally,LatBwasreported
tointerferewithproteintrafﬁctothevacuoleinprotoplastsandintact
roots (Kim et al., 2005). It is important to note, however, that in the
aforementioned studies, high micromolar concentrations of LatB
were used to trigger the reported effects on protein trafﬁcking. The
fact that hlb1 displayed strong protein trafﬁcking and seedling
growth defects in response to low nanomolar doses of LatB sup-
ports the hypothesis that HLB1 is a crucial component of post-Golgi
trafﬁc that is strongly dependent on the maintenance of an intact
actin cytoskeleton. This hypothesis is further reinforced by the
observation that heightened sensitivity to LatB was more
762
The Plant Cell

pronounced in hlb1 and ben1 mutants compared with mutants
with lesions in genes encoding actin itself (e.g., act2 and act8) or
mutants to a suite of other actin regulatory proteins, most of
which were not LatB hypersensitive. In this regard, another
possible explanation for the hypersensitivity of hlb1 mutants to
LatB is that loss of function of HLB1 causes mild recycling
defects of several proteins directly involved in actin function
particularly those that localized to the PM. The collective re-
cyclingdefectsofseveralPM-localizedactinregulatoryproteins,
although mild, could sensitize hlb1 to even low doses of actin
antagonists.
Despite the recycling defects of PIN2-GFP in the hlb1
background, hlb1 did not exhibit the agravitropic phenotype
characteristic of pin2 mutants and were not compromised in
root gravitropism when reoriented by 90 degrees. The absence
of any measurable pin2-like phenotypes in hlb1, ben1, and hlb1
ben1 double mutants supports that the protein recycling de-
fects resulting from loss of HLB1 and BEN1 function may not be
sufﬁcient to completely alter certain PIN2-mediated seedling
root growth processes. This observation further reinforces the
hypothesis that HLB1 and BEN1 function redundantly with other
yet to be identiﬁed TGN/EE-localized proteins in cargo re-
cycling. The possibility that HLB1 has redundant functions with
other nonhomologous proteins can also be inferred from the
lack of global defects in VTI12 and MIN7/BEN1 distribution in
the hlb1 mutant. Alternatively, MIN7/BEN1 could recruit HLB1
to the TGN/EE explaining the lack of any dramatic differences in
MIN7/BEN1-GFP distribution between the wild type and hlb1.
By contrast, root gravitropism has been shown to be driven by
differential degradation of PIN2 in the vacuole of cells in the
elongation zone and PIN3 relocalization to the bottom side of
the columella cell PM (Kleine-Vehn et al., 2008, 2010). The lack
of root gravitropism defects in hlb1 is consistent with the ob-
servation that loss of HLB1 function has only mild effects on
vacuolar trafﬁcking and suggests that HLB1-mediated PIN2
recycling to the PM has minimal contributions to root gravitropic
responses. The normal root gravity response of hlb1 also in-
dicates that unlike PIN2, recycling of PIN3 and possibly other
PIN proteins is independent of HLB1 function. However, ad-
ditional experiments are needed to determine whether the
trafﬁcking of other PIN or PM-localized proteins is affected in the
hlb1 mutant.
In summary, a forward-genetic screen for altered sensitivity to
the actin-disrupting drug LatB led to the discovery of a pre-
viously uncharacterized protein involved in endomembrane
trafﬁcking in plants. The TPR domain-containing HLB1 protein,
which is encoded by a single gene in Arabidopsis, functions in
protein recycling to the PM but could also contribute to con-
stitutive secretion and trafﬁcking to the vacuole in speciﬁc cell
types. The shared phenotypes of hlb1 with other exocytic and
endocytic trafﬁcking mutants such as ben1, bex1, and bex5
indicate that the TGN/EE-localized HLB1 protein lies at a crucial
step where exocytic and endocytic pathways converge and
therefore represent a class of plant-speciﬁc membrane scaffolding
proteins likely involved in linking post-Golgi trafﬁc with the actin
cytoskeleton.
METHODS
Forward-Genetic Screening and Mapping of hlb1
An Arabidopsis thaliana activation-tagged T-DNA seed stock (CS31100)
from the ABRC was sterilized in 95% ethanol and 20% bleach according
to Dyachok et al. (2009). Sterilized seeds were suspended in an auto-
claved solution of 0.53 Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium supple-
mented with 1% sucrose (pH 5.7), 100 nM LatB (Calbiochem-EMD
Chemicals), and 0.5% agar (Sigma-Aldrich) after the solution had cooled
to 55°C. The seed suspension was gently swirled in a 500-mL Erlenmeyer
ﬂask to disperse the seeds uniformly and poured into 10 3 10-cm square
Petri plates before the agar solidiﬁed. Petri dishes were left at 4°C for 2 d
and transferred to a growth chamber with 120 mmol m22 s21 light in-
tensity supplied with ﬂuorescent bulbs and set to a 14-h-light and 10-h-
dark cycle. Temperature in the chamber was maintained at 23°C while
keeping plates in a vertical position. After 5 to 6 d, seedlings with severely
inhibited primary root growth were selected. Primary root growth of the
progeny of selected seedlings was compared with the wild type on
a range of LatB concentrations.
Homozygous hlb1(Col-0ecotype) wascrossedtotheLandsbergerecta
ecotype, and F2 seedlings were selected based on their enhanced sen-
sitivity to50nMLatB.Simplesequence lengthpolymorphism andcleavage
of ampliﬁed polymorphic site markers were used to map hlb1 to a 60-kb
region on the lower arm of chromosome 5 (Lukowitz et al., 2000). DNA was
extractedfromroottissueof2-week-old hlb1seedlingsbygrinding inliquid
nitrogen with a mortar and pestle followed by mixing with an equal volume
of Plant DNAzol Reagent (Invitrogen) and chloroform. After precipitation
with ethanol, DNA was washed multiple times and then dissolved in 50 mL
water. Full-length genomic DNA of various genes in the 60-kb region
was sequenced and compared with the Arabidopsis reference genome
(TAIR10) until the 2-bp deletion was found in AT5G41950.
Three SALK lines with predicted insertions in AT5G41950 (SALK_046760,
SALK_144501, and SALK_065836) were obtained from ABRC and geno-
typed to ensure homozygosity using thefollowingprimers:SALK_046760LP
(59-TTGCTGGAGGAAGCTTGTAAG-39), SALK_046760RP (59-TGGC-
TGTATAACTCACCAGGG-39), SALK_065836LP (59-TTCCCTCTCGCA-
TAAATTGTG-39), SALK_065836RP (59-TCAGGTTGCAATTTGATTTCC-39),
and LBb1.3 (59-ATTTTGCCGATTTCGGAAC-39). The primer pair used for
SALK_144501 was the same as SALK_046760.
One SALK line (SALK_013761) with a predicted exon insertion in
AT3G43300 (MIN7/BEN1) was obtained from ABRC. Homozygous ben1
mutants were isolated using the following primers: SALK_013761LP
(59-TGGAAAGTGAAATTGGTGAGC-39), SALK_013761RP (59-CAAG-
GATTCTTCTCTGCATGG-39), and LBb1.3.
Chemical Treatments and Seedling Growth Assays
Working solutions of LatB (Calbiochem), BFA (Sigma-Aldrich), cytocha-
lasinBandD(MPBiomedicals),indole-3-aceticacid,and1-naphthaleneacetic
acid (Sigma-Aldrich) were diluted from stock solutions in DMSO. Working
solutions of sodium chloride and mannitol (Sigma-Aldrich) were prepared
directly from solids from the manufacturer’s containers. Seedling growth
assays were conducted by transplanting 3- to 4-d-old seedlings grown on
solid (1% agar) onto MS medium supplemented with the various chem-
icals. Seedlings were grown vertically for an additional 4 to 7 d after
transplanting in a 14-h-light (120 mmol m22 s21) and 10-h-dark cycle or in
complete darkness in a growth chamber set to 23°C. In another set of
experiments, 4-d-old seedlings with straight primary roots were trans-
planted on new Petri plates with MS medium. After 1 h of vertical growth,
plates were reoriented by 90 degrees and primary roots were photo-
graphed every hour for 12 h. Images of seedlings were captured using
a DXM1200C digital camera (Nikon) mounted on a copy stand or an SZX12
stereomicroscope (Olympus). Hypocotyl, primary root and root hair
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
763

lengths, and root curvature were measured using the Image J v1.49
software (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/).
The 3- to 4-d-old wild-type (Col-0 ecotype) and hlb1 seedlings expressing
PIN2-GFP or HLB1-GFP were incubated on BFA or LatB diluted with MS
mediumonwelledplatesforvarioustimeperiodsandmountedonglassslides
prior to imaging with a Leica TCS AOBS confocal scanning laser microscope
(Leica Microsystems). For endocytic assays, a working solution of 4 mM FM1-
43 (Invitrogen) was prepared in MS medium from a 10 mM aqueous solution.
After incubating for 30 min in liquid MS medium, 3- to 4-d-old seedlings were
pulselabeledwithFM1-43for5minatroomtemperature.Seedlingswerethen
treated with 50 mM BFA for 1 h prior to confocal imaging. In a separate set of
seedlings expressing PIN2-GFP or pulse-labeled with FM1-43, BFA was
washed out by transferring seedlings to liquid MS medium prior to imaging.
Generation of HLB1-Green Fluorescent Protein Constructs
The HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP construct was generated from full-length HLB1
gDNA extracted from roots of 2-week-old wild-type Arabidopsis seedlings
usingthePlantDNAzolReagent(Invitrogen).Full-lengthHLB1gDNAincluding
;400 bp immediatelypreceding the start codon (3319 bp total) was ampliﬁed
using the following primers: HLBpro-F-XmaI (59-CATCCCGGGGACTACT-
TATATCTTTCACTCTTGTTC-39) and HLBpro-R-XmaI (59-TACCCCGGG-
CACCGGTGATAATACCGGCTA-39).Theproduct wasclonedintoamodiﬁed
pCAMBIA1390 vector as described (Wang et al., 2008).
35Spro:GFP-HLB1 was generated from full-length HLB1 cDNA (1698 bp)
ampliﬁed using the following primers: HLB-F-NcoI (59-CATCCATGGTAAT-
GGCGGATACTGTTGAAGAG-39) and HLB-R-SpeI (59- CATACTAGT-
TTAACCGGTGATAATACCGGC-39). The resulting product was digested
with NcoI and SpeI (New England Biolabs) and cloned into a modiﬁed
pCAMBIA1390 vector behind the CaMV 35S promoter driving expression
of GFP (Wang et al., 2008). To generate the GFP-HLB1ΔCTD fusion, a trun-
cated HLB1 cDNA fragment, fromposition 1 to 1482bp, was ampliﬁed using
the primers HLB1-F-NcoI and HLB1ΔCTD-R-SpeI (59-TACACTAGTTTA-
TACCGTCTTCCTCTCCACGT-39), and the resulting product was digested
with NcoI and SpeI (New England Biolabs) and cloned into a modiﬁed
pCAMBIA1390 vector. Similarly, the GFP-HLB1ΔTPR fusion was created by
ﬁrst amplifying HLB1 cDNA from position 1 to 609 bp with the following
primers: HLB1ΔTPR-F-NcoI (59-CATCCATGGTAATGGCGGATACTGTTGAA-
GAG-39)andHLB1ΔTPR-R-SpeI(59-TACACTAGTACGTTGGCGAGATCGACC-
39). This fragment was digested with NcoI and SpeI (New England Biolabs) and
cloned into a modiﬁed pCAMBIA1390 vector to created HLB11-609. Next, an
HLB1 cDNA fragment was ampliﬁed from position 1276 to 1698 bp with the
following
primers:
HLB1ΔTPR(2)-F-SpeI
(59-CATACTAGTCTACCTCTCCC-
GCATCTTAAAGT-39) and HLB1ΔTPR(2)-R-PmlI (59-TACCACGTGTTAACC-
GGTGATAATACCGGC-39). This fragment was digested with SpeI and PmlI
(New England Biolabs) and cloned into the HLB11-609 construct. The 35Spro:
OsHLB1-GFP construct was generated by amplifying full-length OsHLB1
cDNA (1449 bp) with the primers OsHLB1-F-SalI (59-CATGTCGACATGG-
AGGATTCTGCGCGG-39) and OsHLB1-R-EcoRI (59-GTAGAATTCAC-
CAGTAATGATACCTGCCAATACA-39). The product was digested with
SalI and EcoRI (New England Biolabs) and again cloned into a modiﬁed
pCAMBIA1390 vector. Constructs were introduced into hlb1-1 via Agro-
bacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation using the ﬂoral dip
method (Clough and Bent, 1998).
Confocal Microscopy and Colocalization Studies
hlb1-1 seedlings expressing HLB1pro:HLB1-GFP were crossed with
various red- or cyan-emitting marker lines. The PIN2-GFP, Man49-mCherry,
SYP61-CFP, mCherry-VTI12, mCherry-RabA1g, mCherry-Ara6, GFP-ABD2-
GFP, mCherry-ABD2-mCherry, MIN7/BEN1-GFP, RFP-AFVY, and SEC-RFP
lines were described previously (Nelson et al., 2007; Robert et al., 2008;
Geldneretal.,2009;Nomuraetal.,2011;Feraruetal.,2012;Rennaetal.,2013;
Dyachok et al., 2014). To generate the UBQ10pro:Lifeact-mEGFP construct,
mEGFPwiththe51-bpLifeactsequencedirectlyupstreamwasampliﬁedfrom
plasmid DNA described by Vidali et al. (2009) using the following primers:
Lifeact-F-EcoRI (59-CATGAATTCATGGGTGTCGCAGATTTGATC-39) and
Lifeact-R-SpeI (59-TACACTAGTTTACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGC-39). The
resulting product was digested with EcoRI and SpeI (New England Biolabs)
and cloned behind the UBQ10 promoter in a modiﬁed pCAMBIA1390 vector.
Five-day-old seedlings coexpressing HLB1-GFP and various red- or cyan-
emitting markers were imaged with a Leica confocal microscope or Perkin-
Elmer UltraView ERS spinning-disc confocal microscope.
For quantiﬁcation of F-actin and TGN/EE dynamics, images of epi-
dermal cells in the root maturation zone or root hairs growing along the
bottom of 48 3 64-mm cover slips coated with MS medium in 0.5% agar
were captured every 0.5 to 1 s for 1 to 3 min with a Perkin-Elmer spinning-
discconfocalmicroscope equipped withaZeissC-Apochromat633water
or a 1003 oil immersion objective.
Image Analysis
Percentage of occupancy of F-actin was determined using the algorithm
described by Higaki et al. (2010). Prior to applying the Higaki algorithm, single
cells from the root elongation zone were converted into binary images and
ﬁlaments skeletonized by software that was developed using MATLAB
R2013a (The Mathworks Inc.) as described (Dyachok et al., 2014). Intensity of
BFA agglomerates was obtained using custom software written in MATLAB
8.5. The original images from the confocal microscope were ﬁrst converted to
gray scale and separated into 48 layers by intensity values from zero to
maximum (255*255), and a binary image was created. The circle Hough
Transform method was used to trace areas occupied by BFA- and LatB-in-
duced PIN2-GFP or FM1-43 agglomerates in the binary images. The average
intensity in grayscale images in each of marked agglomerate was calculated.
From the same set of images used to calculate agglomerate ﬂuorescence
intensity, the number of agglomerates per cell was manually counted.
Quantiﬁcation and statistical analyses of global F-actin and YFP-VTI12
dynamics were conducted following the methods of Vidali et al. (2010) and
Dyachok et al. (2014) using images of root epidermal cells and root hairs
fromatleast15time-lapsemoviesequences.Toadoptthemethodusedfor
global analysis of F-actin to dynamics of YFP-VTI12 foci in root hairs, we
ﬁrst created an algorithm that utilized the Hough Transform method to
detect individual organelles from binary images obtained from time-lapse
movies. This algorithm allowed us to set a threshold so that ﬂuorescence
originating from the cytoplasm was excluded from our analysis.
To quantify ﬂuorescence in the PM and cell interior of PIN2-GFP-
expressing root cells, we created another algorithm. After converting
images to gray scale, binary images were generated after separating the
image into 48 layers and classifying the layers based on their intensity
values. This allowed us to separate ﬂuorescence of the PM from the cell
interior where the white area in the binary image corresponded to PM
signals and the black area corresponded to the cell interior. Fluorescence
intensity was calculated by accumulating the intensity value of each pixel
from the PM and cell interior.
To quantify the extent of colocalization between HLB1-GFP and other
mCherry-tagged TGN/EE markers, spinning-disc confocal images were ﬁrst
thresholded using the Volocity quantitation software (Perkin-Elmer). The
colocalization function of Volocity allows automated thresholding and sta-
tistical analyses of red and green channels according to the methods of
Mandersetal.(1993)andCostesetal.(2004).Fromthecolocalizationmenuof
Volocity quantitation, a region of interest representing a single cell (Figure 7A)
was selected, and from generated scatterplots (Figure 7F) (Bottanelli et al.,
2012), Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient values were calculated.
Phylogenetic Analysis and Bioinformatics
To deduce phylogeny of HLB1, sequences for 141 homologous proteins
from 79 species were obtained from GenBank. The amino acid sequences
764
The Plant Cell

were aligned by MUSCLE algorithm (Edgar, 2004), and unreliable se-
quences with conﬁdence score lower than 0.6 were removed (Penn et al.,
2010). The alignment is available as Supplemental Data Set 3. Subsequent
phylogenetic analyses were conducted in MEGA6 (Tamura et al., 2013)
based on the maximum likelihood method (Le and Gascuel, 2008). A matrix
of pairwisedistances wasestimated bytheJTT model, andthetree withthe
highest log likelihood (12,977) was chosen with the Neighbor-join and
BIONJ algorithm. A discrete gamma distribution was used to model
evolutionary rate differences among sites (+G, parameter = 3.2081). All
positions with <95% site coverage were eliminated.
To ﬁnd TPR-containing proteins, the Arabidopsis genome was scanned
with TPRpred (Karpenahalli et al., 2007). The resulting 587 proteins were
compared against the Conserved Domain Database (Marchler-Bauer et al.,
2015). The 147 Arabidopsis proteins were identiﬁed to have more than one
TPR motifs. Predicated subcellular localization for the TPR proteins was
obtained from the SubCellular Proteome Database and presented in
Supplemental Data Set 1.
Co-IP
Co-IP experiments were conducted using the Pierce Classic IP kit (Thermo
Scientiﬁc). Brieﬂy, proteins were extracted by grinding roots of 2-week-old
Arabidopsis seedlings expressing 35Spro:GFP, 35Spro:GFP-HLB, and
35Spro:MIN7/BEN1-GFP in liquid nitrogen. The ﬁne powder was then
mixed with extraction/wash solution supplemented with 1:100 protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) by vortexing. The protein extracts were
centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was mixed with
controlresinviaend-over-endshakingina15-mLFalcontubefor1hat4°C.
The mixture was then added to a spin column and centrifuged at 1000g for
30 s at 4°C. Rabbit Anti-GFP Monoclonal Antibody (ABCAM catalog
number1218, lot number GR181836-3) was added to the cleared protein
lysate and mixed by end-over-end shaking overnight at 4°C. Protein A/G
plus agarose resin was then added and allowed to mix for 1 h at 4°C. The
mixture wasagain addedto aspin column andcentrifuged at 1000gfor 30s
at 4°C. The columns were washed ﬁve times with extraction/wash solution
and then one time with 13 conditioning buffer. The proteins were eluted by
adding 23 nonreducing lane marker sample buffer with 20 mM DTT and
heating for 10 min at 100°C. Once cooled, the columns were placed inside
Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 1000g for 30 s at 4°C. Composition of
the eluent was analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (Bioproximity).
Brieﬂy, the samples were digested with trypsin (10 mg/mL) overnight at
37°C.Theresultingpeptidesweredriedandredissolvedin50%acetonitrile
with 0.5% triﬂuoroacetic acid. The peptides were resolved with Thermo
Easy-nLC1000 column (C18 reverse phase, 50 cm, f 75 mm), ionized with
ThermoEasySpray,andthenanalyzedwithaThermoQ-exactivequadrupole-
Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The spectra were assigned to peptides using
the OMSSA (Geer et al., 2004), X!Tandem (Craig and Beavis, 2004), and X!
Hunter (Craig et al., 2006) algorithms.
Accession Numbers
Sequence data from this article can be found in the Arabidopsis Genome
Initiative or GenBank/ EMBL databases under the following accession
numbers: HLB1 (AT5G41950) and MIN7/BEN1 (AT3G43300). Protein
accession numbers for HLB1 orthologs are as follows: Aegilops tauschii,
gi|475447842; Amborella trichopoda, gi|548852614; Arabidopsis lyrata, gi|
297805444; Arabidopsis thaliana, gi|133778836; Arabis alpina,
gi|674240218; Beta vulgaris, gi|731331895; Brachypodium distachyon, gi|
357114392; Brassica napus, gi|674870500; Brassica rapa, gi|685298732;
Camelina sativa, gi|727533856; Capsella rubella, gi|565442422; Chlorella
variabilis, gi|552830027; Cicer arietinum, gi|502116595; Citrus clementina,
gi|557541493; Citrus sinensis, gi|641857964; Coccomyxa subellipsoidea,
gi|545359525; Coffea canephora, gi|661884304; Cucumis melo, gi|
659095407, gi|307136085; Cucumis sativus, gi|700200538; Elaeis gui-
neensis, gi|743777795; Erythranthe guttata, gi|604327766; Eucalyptus
grandis, gi|702322982; Eutrema salsugineum, gi|567192832; Fragaria
vesca, gi|470147958; Genlisea aurea, gi|527191692; Glycine max,
gi|356576620; Glycine soja, gi|734324220; Gossypium arboreum, gi|
728819858; Hordeum vulgare, gi|326492972; Jatropha curcas,
gi|643711772; Lolium perenne, gi|374921937; Malus domestica, gi|
657995845; Medicago truncatula, gi|657404132; Micromonas pusilla, gi|
303278672; Morus notabilis, gi|703112722; Musa acuminate,
gi|695027101; Nelumbo nucifera, gi|720036758; Nicotiana sylvestris, gi|
698531617;Nicotiana tomentosiformis,gi|697157841; Oryzabrachyantha,
gi|573926901; Oryza sativa Indica, gi|125532651; Oryza sativa Japonica, gi|
108705829; Ostreococcus
tauri, gi|693498951;
Phaseolus vulgaris,
gi|561035046; Phoenix dactylifera, gi|672133847; Physcomitrella patens,
gi|162670631; Populus euphratica, gi|743825082; Populus trichocarpa, gi|
550343167; Prunus mume, gi|645267755; Prunus persica, gi|462406973;
Pyrus 3 bretschneideri, gi|694355322; Ricinus communis, gi|255555737;
Selaginella moellendorfﬁi, gi|302804999; Sesamum indicum, gi|
747048717; Setaria italica, gi|514815687; Solanum lycopersicum,
gi|525313946; Solanum tuberosum, gi|565353752; Sorghum bicolor, gi|
242039083; Tarenaya hassleriana, gi|729396960; Theobroma cacao, gi|
590675266;Triticumurartu,gi|474237686;Vitisvinifera,gi|731378821;and
Zea mays, gi|194707904.
Supplemental Data
Supplemental Figure 1. Hypocotyl and Root Hair Growth of hlb1 Are
Hypersensitive to LatB.
Supplemental Figure 2. hlb1 Is Hypersensitive to Cytochalasin B and D.
Supplemental Figure 3. hlb1 Is Not Hypersensitive to Other Treat-
ments That Inhibit Primary Root Growth.
Supplemental Figure 4. hlb1 Is More Sensitive to LatB Compared to
Other Mutants That Directly Affect the Actin Cytoskeleton.
Supplemental Figure 5. Cell Division and Expansion of hlb1 Roots
Are Strongly Inhibited by LatB.
Supplemental Figure 6. Quantitative Analysis of Global F-Actin
Dynamics in Root Epidermal Cells and Root Hairs.
Supplemental Figure 7. Nature of HLB1 Mutation and Characteriza-
tion of Other hlb1 Alleles.
Supplemental Figure 8. Phylogenetic Analysis of HLB1 Sequences in
Land Plants.
Supplemental Figure 9. 35Spro:GFP-HLB1 Complements the Hyper-
sensitivity to LatB and Short Primary Root Phenotypes of hlb1-1.
Supplemental Figure 10. The C-Terminal Domain Targets HLB1 to
the TGN/EE.
Supplemental Figure 11. HLB1-GFP and the TGN/EE Markers (YFP-
VTI12 and SYP61-CFP) in the Root Elongation Zone Form Intracellular
Agglomerates upon Exposure to LatB.
Supplemental Figure 12. Oryza sativa HLB1 Partially Complements
the Arabidopsis hlb1 Mutant.
Supplemental Figure 13. HLB1 Functions in Similar Genetic Path-
ways as BEN1.
Supplemental Figure 14. Global Organization and Dynamics of YFP-
VTI12 and MIN7/BEN1-GFP in hlb1.
Supplemental Figure 15. Quantiﬁcation of Root Growth Orientation
and Gravitropism in hlb1 Seedlings.
Supplemental Figure 16. hlb1 Has Mild Defects in Bulk Protein
Secretion and Trafﬁcking to the Vacuole.
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
765

Supplemental Figure 17. FM1-43 Agglomerates Persist in hlb1 after
BFA Washout.
Supplemental Movie 1. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of
F-Actin Dynamics in a Root Hair from a Wild-Type and hlb1 Seedling
Expressing UBQ10pro:GFP-ABD2-GFP.
Supplemental Movie 2. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of
F-Actin Dynamics in a Root Hair from a Wild-Type and hlb1 Seedling
Expressing UBQ10pro:Lifeact-mGFP.
Supplemental Movie 3. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of
F-Actin Dynamics in a Root Epidermal Cell from the Maturation
Zone of a Wild-Type Seedling.
Supplemental Movie 4. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of
HLB1-GFP Dynamics in a Root Hair.
Supplemental Movie 5. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of Root
Cells Coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-VTI12.
Supplemental Movie 6. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of Root
Cells Coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-RabA1g.
Supplemental Movie 7. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of
Hypocotyl Epidermal Cells Coexpressing HLB1-GFP and Man49-mCherry.
Supplemental Movie 8. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of Root
Cells Coexpressing HLB1-GFP and mCherry-ARA6.
Supplemental Movie 9. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of Root
Epidermal Cells in the Maturation Zone Coexpressing HLB1-GFP and
mCherry-ABD2-mCherry.
Supplemental Movie 10. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of the
Base of a Mature Root Hair Cell Coexpressing HLB1-GFP and
mCherry-ABD2-mCherry.
Supplemental Movie 11. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of Root
Cells Coexpressing HLB1-mCherry and MIN7/BEN1-GFP.
Supplemental Movie 12. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of YFP-
VTI12 Dynamics in Wild-Type and hlb1 Root Hairs.
Supplemental Movie 13. Spinning-Disc Confocal Microscopy of
SEC-RFP Dynamics in Wild-type and hlb1 Root Hairs.
Supplemental Data Set 1. List of 147 Proteins in the Arabidopsis
Genome with TPR Motifs.
Supplemental Data Set 2. Peptides Detected by Tandem Mass
Spectrometry in the Coimmunoprecipitates.
Supplemental Data Set 3. Text File of the Alignment used for the
Phylogenetic Analysis Shown in Supplemental Figure 8.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion(NASAGrantNNX12AM94G)andtheSamuelRobertsNobleFoundationto
E.B.B. and the Department of Energy (Grants BER DE-FC02-07ER64494 and
DE-FG02-91ER20021) and MSU AgBioResearch to F.B. We thank Niko
Geldner, Georgia Drakakaki, Christopher Staiger, Magdalena Bezanilla, and
Sheng Yang He for providing published material used in this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.A.S. generated plant material and research reagents used in the study.
J.A.S. and E.B.B. conducted forward-genetic screens and plant growth
assays. J.A.S. and T.K. performed co-IP experiments. J.A.S., L.R., F.B.,
and E.B.B. performed confocal imaging experiments. T.K. conducted
bioinformatics studies. F.L. conducted image analysis and quantiﬁcation
of confocal microscope images and contributed new computational image
analysis tools. All authors contributed to writing speciﬁc sections of the
manuscript.
Received September 15, 2015; revised February 16, 2016; accepted
February 25, 2016; published March 3, 2016.
REFERENCES
Almeida, C.G., Yamada, A., Tenza, D., Louvard, D., Raposo, G., and
Coudrier, E. (2011). Myosin 1b promotes the formation of post-
Golgi carriers by regulating actin assembly and membrane remod-
elling at the trans-Golgi network. Nat. Cell Biol. 13: 779–789.
Alonso, J.M., et al. (2003). Genome-wide insertional mutagenesis of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Science 301: 653–657.
Anitei, M., and Hoﬂack, B. (2012). Bridging membrane and cytoskeleton
dynamics in the secretory and endocytic pathways. Nat. Cell Biol. 14: 11–19.
Asaoka, R., Uemura, T., Ito, J., Fujimoto, M., Ito, E., Ueda, T., and
Nakano, A. (2013). Arabidopsis RABA1 GTPases are involved in
transport between the trans-Golgi network and the plasma mem-
brane, and are required for salinity stress tolerance. Plant J. 73:
240–249.
Barberon, M., and Geldner, N. (2014). Radial transport of nutrients:
the plant root as a polarized epithelium. Plant Physiol. 166: 528–537.
Basu, D., Le, J., Zakharova, T., Mallery, E.L., and Szymanski, D.B.
(2008). A SPIKE1 signaling complex controls actin-dependent cell
morphogenesis through the heteromeric WAVE and ARP2/3 com-
plexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105: 4044–4049.
Bhuiyan, N.H., Friso, G., Poliakov, A., Ponnala, L., and van Wijk,
K.J. (2015). MET1 is a thylakoid-associated TPR protein involved in
photosystem II supercomplex formation and repair in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 27: 262–285.
Blatch, G.L., and Lässle, M. (1999). The tetratricopeptide repeat:
a structural motif mediating protein-protein interactions. BioEssays
21: 932–939.
Boevink, P., Oparka, K., Santa Cruz, S., Martin, B., Betteridge, A.,
and Hawes, C. (1998). Stacks on tracks: the plant Golgi apparatus
trafﬁcs on an actin/ER network. Plant J. 15: 441–447.
Boss, W.F., and Im, Y.J. (2012). Phosphoinositide signaling. Annu.
Rev. Plant Biol. 63: 409–429.
Bottanelli, F., Gershlick, D.C., and Denecke, J. (2012). Evidence for
sequential action of Rab5 and Rab7 GTPases in prevacuolar or-
ganelle partitioning. Trafﬁc 13: 338–354.
Brandizzi, F., and Barlowe, C. (2013). Organization of the ER-Golgi
interface for membrane trafﬁc control. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14:
382–392.
Brandizzi, F., Snapp, E.L., Roberts, A.G., Lippincott-Schwartz, J.,
and Hawes, C. (2002). Membrane protein transport between the
endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi in tobacco leaves is energy
dependent but cytoskeleton independent: evidence from selective
photobleaching. Plant Cell 14: 1293–1309.
Chen, Y.-N., Slabaugh, E., and Brandizzi, F. (2008). Membrane-
tethered transcription factors in Arabidopsis thaliana: novel regu-
lators in stress response and development. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
11: 695–701.
Chow, C.-M., Neto, H., Foucart, C., and Moore, I. (2008). Rab-A2
and Rab-A3 GTPases deﬁne a trans-golgi endosomal membrane
domain in Arabidopsis that contributes substantially to the cell
plate. Plant Cell 20: 101–123.
Clairfeuille, T., Norwood, S.J., Qi, X., Teasdale, R.D., and Collins,
B.M. (2015). Structure and membrane binding properties of the
766
The Plant Cell

endosomal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain-containing sort-
ing nexins SNX20 and SNX21. J. Biol. Chem. 290: 14504–14517.
Clough, S.J., and Bent, A.F. (1998). Floral dip: a simpliﬁed method for
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana.
Plant J. 16: 735–743.
Contento, A.L., and Bassham, D.C. (2012). Structure and function of
endosomes in plant cells. J. Cell Sci. 125: 3511–3518.
Costes, S.V., Daelemans, D., Cho, E.H., Dobbin, Z., Pavlakis, G., and
Lockett, S. (2004). Automatic and quantitative measurement of protein-
protein colocalization in live cells. Biophys. J. 86: 3993–4003.
Craig, R., and Beavis, R.C. (2004). TANDEM: matching proteins with
tandem mass spectra. Bioinformatics 20: 1466–1467.
Craig, R., Cortens, J.C., Fenyo, D., and Beavis, R.C. (2006). Using
annotated peptide mass spectrum libraries for protein identiﬁcation.
J. Proteome Res. 5: 1843–1849.
Cvrcková, F., Oulehlová, D., and ˇZárský, V. (2015). Formins: linking cy-
toskeleton and endomembranes in plant cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 16: 1–18.
D’Andrea, L.D., and Regan, L. (2003). TPR proteins: the versatile
helix. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28: 655–662.
Deeks, M.J., Calcutt, J.R., Ingle, E.K., Hawkins, T.J., Chapman, S.,
Richardson, A.C., Mentlak, D.A., Dixon, M.R., Cartwright, F.,
Smertenko, A.P., Oparka, K., and Hussey, P.J. (2012). A super-
family of actin-binding proteins at the actin-membrane nexus of
higher plants. Curr. Biol. 22: 1595–1600.
Derivery, E., Sousa, C., Gautier, J.J., Lombard, B., Loew, D., and
Gautreau, A. (2009). The Arp2/3 activator WASH controls the ﬁssion of
endosomes through a large multiprotein complex. Dev. Cell 17: 712–723.
Dettmer, J., Hong-Hermesdorf, A., Stierhof, Y.-D., and Schumacher, K.
(2006). Vacuolar H+-ATPase activity is required for endocytic and se-
cretory trafﬁcking in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 18: 715–730.
Doyle, S.M., Haeger, A., Vain, T., Rigal, A., Viotti, C., Łangowska,
M., Ma, Q., Friml, J., Raikhel, N.V., Hicks, G.R., and Robert, S.
(2015). An early secretory pathway mediated by GNOM-LIKE 1 and
GNOM is essential for basal polarity establishment in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112: E806–E815.
Dyachok, J., Sparks, J.A., Liao, F., Wang, Y.S., and Blancaﬂor, E.B.
(2014). Fluorescent protein-based reporters of the actin cytoskele-
ton in living plant cells: ﬂuorophore variant, actin binding domain,
and promoter considerations. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken) 71: 311–327.
Dyachok, J., Yoo, C.-M., Palanichelvam, K., and Blancaﬂor, E.B.
(2009). Sample preparation for ﬂuorescence imaging of the cyto-
skeleton in ﬁxed and living plant roots. In Cytoskeleton Methods
and Protocols: Methods in Molecular Biology, 2nd ed, R.H. Gavin,
ed (Totowa, NJ: Humana Press), pp. 157–169.
Dyachok, J., Zhu, L., Liao, F., He, J., Huq, E., and Blancaﬂor, E.B.
(2011). SCAR mediates light-induced root elongation in Arabidopsis
through photoreceptors and proteasomes. Plant Cell 23: 3610–3626.
Ebine, K., Okatani, Y., Uemura, T., Goh, T., Shoda, K., Niihama, M.,
Morita, M.T., Spitzer, C., Otegui, M.S., Nakano, A., and Ueda, T.
(2008). A SNARE complex unique to seed plants is required for
protein storage vacuole biogenesis and seed development of Ara-
bidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 20: 3006–3021.
Ebine, K., et al. (2011). A membrane trafﬁcking pathway regulated by
the plant-speciﬁc RAB GTPase ARA6. Nat. Cell Biol. 13: 853–859.
Edgar, R.C. (2004). MUSCLE: a multiple sequence alignment method with
reduced time and space complexity. BMC Bioinformatics 5: 113.
Faso, C., Chen, Y.-N., Tamura, K., Held, M., Zemelis, S., Marti, L.,
Saravanan, R., Hummel, E., Kung, L., Miller, E., Hawes, C., and
Brandizzi, F. (2009). A missense mutation in the Arabidopsis COPII
coat protein Sec24A induces the formation of clusters of the en-
doplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Plant Cell 21: 3655–3671.
Feraru, E., Feraru, M.I., Asaoka, R., Paciorek, T., De Rycke, R.,
Tanaka, H., Nakano, A., and Friml, J. (2012). BEX5/RabA1b
regulates trans-Golgi network-to-plasma membrane protein traf-
ﬁcking in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 24: 3074–3086.
Fujimoto, M., and Ueda, T. (2012). Conserved and plant-unique mecha-
nisms regulating plant post-Golgi trafﬁc. Front. Plant Sci. 3: 197.
Garcia de la Garma, J., Fernandez-Garcia, N., Bardisi, E., Pallol,
B., Asensio-Rubio, J.S., Bru, R., and Olmos, E. (2015). New in-
sights into plant salt acclimation: the roles of vesicle trafﬁcking and
reactive oxygen species signalling in mitochondria and the endo-
membrane system. New Phytol. 205: 216–239.
Geer, L.Y., Markey, S.P., Kowalak, J.A., Wagner, L., Xu, M.,
Maynard, D.M., Yang, X., Shi, W., and Bryant, S.H. (2004). Open
mass spectrometry search algorithm. J. Proteome Res. 3: 958–964.
Geldner, N., Dénervaud-Tendon, V., Hyman, D.L., Mayer, U.,
Stierhof, Y.D., and Chory, J. (2009). Rapid, combinatorial analy-
sis of membrane compartments in intact plants with a multicolor
marker set. Plant J. 59: 169–178.
Geldner, N., Friml, J., Stierhof, Y.-D., Jürgens, G., and Palme, K.
(2001). Auxin transport inhibitors block PIN1 cycling and vesicle
trafﬁcking. Nature 413: 425–428.
Geldner, N., Hyman, D.L., Wang, X., Schumacher, K., and Chory, J.
(2007). Endosomal signaling of plant steroid receptor kinase BRI1.
Genes Dev. 21: 1598–1602.
Gendre, D., Jonsson, K., Boutté, Y., and Bhalerao, R.P. (2015).
Journey to the cell surface–the central role of the trans-Golgi net-
work in plants. Protoplasma 252: 385–398.
Gendre, D., McFarlane, H.E., Johnson, E., Mouille, G., Sjödin, A.,
Oh, J., Levesque-Tremblay, G., Watanabe, Y., Samuels, L., and
Bhalerao, R.P. (2013). Trans-Golgi network localized ECHIDNA/Ypt
interacting protein complex is required for the secretion of cell wall
polysaccharides in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 25: 2633–2646.
Gendre, D., Oh, J., Boutté, Y., Best, J.G., Samuels, L., Nilsson, R.,
Uemura, T., Marchant, A., Bennett, M.J., Grebe, M., and
Bhalerao, R.P. (2011). Conserved Arabidopsis ECHIDNA protein
mediates trans-Golgi-network trafﬁcking and cell elongation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108: 8048–8053.
Grebe, M., Xu, J., Möbius, W., Ueda, T., Nakano, A., Geuze, H.J.,
Rook, M.B., and Scheres, B. (2003). Arabidopsis sterol endocy-
tosis involves actin-mediated trafﬁcking via ARA6-positive early
endosomes. Curr. Biol. 13: 1378–1387.
Guet, D., Mandal, K., Pinot, M., Hoffmann, J., Abidine, Y., Sigaut,
W., Bardin, S., Schauer, K., Goud, B., and Manneville, J.-B.
(2014). Mechanical role of actin dynamics in the rheology of the
Golgi complex and in Golgi-associated trafﬁcking events. Curr. Biol.
24: 1700–1711.
Hachez, C., Laloux, T., Reinhardt, H., Cavez, D., Degand, H., Grefen, C.,
De Rycke, R., Inzé, D., Blatt, M.R., Russinova, E., and Chaumont, F.
(2014). Arabidopsis SNAREs SYP61 and SYP121 coordinate the traf-
ﬁcking of plasma membrane aquaporin PIP2;7 to modulate the cell
membrane water permeability. Plant Cell 26: 3132–3147.
Henty-Ridilla, J.L., Li, J., Day, B., and Staiger, C.J. (2014). ACTIN
DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR4 regulates actin dynamics during in-
nate immune signaling in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 26: 340–352.
Higaki, T., Kutsuna, N., Sano, T., Kondo, N., and Hasezawa, S.
(2010). Quantiﬁcation and cluster analysis of actin cytoskeletal
structures in plant cells: role of actin bundling in stomatal move-
ment during diurnal cycles in Arabidopsis guard cells. Plant J. 61:
156–165.
Hu, Z., Xu, F., Guan, L., Qian, P., Liu, Y., Zhang, H., Huang, Y., and
Hou, S. (2014). The tetratricopeptide repeat-containing protein slow
green1 is required for chloroplast development in Arabidopsis. J.
Exp. Bot. 65: 1111–1123.
Hunter, P.R., Craddock, C.P., Di Benedetto, S., Roberts, L.M., and
Frigerio, L. (2007). Fluorescent reporter proteins for the tonoplast
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
767

and the vacuolar lumen identify a single vacuolar compartment in
Arabidopsis cells. Plant Physiol. 145: 1371–1382.
Jacobsen, S.E., Binkowski, K.A., and Olszewski, N.E. (1996).
SPINDLY, a tetratricopeptide repeat protein involved in gibberellin
signal transduction in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:
9292–9296.
Jia, H., Li, J., Zhu, J., Fan, T., Qian, D., Zhou, Y., Wang, J., Ren, H.,
Xiang, Y., and An, L. (2013). Arabidopsis CROLIN1, a novel plant
actin-binding protein, functions in cross-linking and stabilizing actin
ﬁlaments. J. Biol. Chem. 288: 32277–32288.
Jimenez-Lopez,
J.C.,
Wang,
X.,
Kotchoni,
S.O.,
Huang,
S.,
Szymanski, D.B., and Staiger, C.J. (2014). Heterodimeric cap-
ping protein from Arabidopsis is a membrane-associated, actin-
binding protein. Plant Physiol. 166: 1312–1328.
Kandasamy, M.K., McKinney, E.C., and Meagher, R.B. (2009). A
single vegetative actin isovariant overexpressed under the control
of multiple regulatory sequences is sufﬁcient for normal Arabidopsis
development. Plant Cell 21: 701–718.
Kang, B.H., Nielsen, E., Preuss, M.L., Mastronarde, D., and
Staehelin, L.A. (2011). Electron tomography of RabA4b- and PI-
4Kb1-labeled trans Golgi network compartments in Arabidopsis.
Trafﬁc 12: 313–329.
Karpenahalli, M.R., Lupas, A.N., and Söding, J. (2007). TPRpred:
a tool for prediction of TPR-, PPR- and SEL1-like repeats from
protein sequences. BMC Bioinformatics 8: 2.
Kim, H., Park, M., Kim, S.J., and Hwang, I. (2005). Actin ﬁlaments
play a critical role in vacuolar trafﬁcking at the Golgi complex in
plant cells. Plant Cell 17: 888–902.
Kim, S.J., and Brandizzi, F. (2014). The plant secretory pathway: an essential
factory for building the plant cell wall. Plant Cell Physiol. 55: 687–693.
Kim, S.J., Held, M.A., Zemelis, S., Wilkerson, C., and Brandizzi, F.
(2015). CGR2 and CGR3 have critical overlapping roles in pectin
methylesteriﬁcation and plant growth in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant
J. 82: 208–220.
Kleine-Vehn, J., Ding, Z., Jones, A.R., Tasaka, M., Morita, M.T.,
and Friml, J. (2010). Gravity-induced PIN transcytosis for polari-
zation of auxin ﬂuxes in gravity-sensing root cells. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 107: 22344–22349.
Kleine-Vehn, J., Leitner, J., Zwiewka, M., Sauer, M., Abas, L.,
Luschnig, C., and Friml, J. (2008). Differential degradation of PIN2
auxin efﬂux carrier by retromer-dependent vacuolar targeting. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105: 17812–17817.
Kusano, H., Testerink, C., Vermeer, J.E., Tsuge, T., Shimada, H.,
Oka, A., Munnik, T., and Aoyama, T. (2008). The Arabidopsis
phosphatidylinositol phosphate 5-kinase PIP5K3 is a key regulator
of root hair tip growth. Plant Cell 20: 367–380.
Le, S.Q., and Gascuel, O. (2008). An improved general amino acid
replacement matrix. Mol. Biol. Evol. 25: 1307–1320.
Li, J., Henty-Ridilla, J.L., Huang, S., Wang, X., Blanchoin, L., and
Staiger, C.J. (2012). Capping protein modulates the dynamic be-
havior of actin ﬁlaments in response to phosphatidic acid in Ara-
bidopsis. Plant Cell 24: 3742–3754.
Li, J., Henty-Ridilla, J.L., Staiger, B.H., Day, B., and Staiger, C.J.
(2015). Capping protein integrates multiple MAMP signalling path-
ways to modulate actin dynamics during plant innate immunity. Nat.
Commun. 6: 7206.
Li, J., Staiger, B.H., Henty-Ridilla, J.L., Abu-Abied, M., Sadot, E.,
Blanchoin, L., and Staiger, C.J. (2014). The availability of ﬁlament
ends modulates actin stochastic dynamics in live plant cells. Mol.
Biol. Cell 25: 1263–1275.
Lozano-Durán, R., Bourdais, G., He, S.Y., and Robatzek, S. (2014).
The bacterial effector HopM1 suppresses PAMP-triggered oxidative
burst and stomatal immunity. New Phytol. 202: 259–269.
Lukowitz, W., Gillmor, C.S., and Scheible, W.-R. (2000). Positional
cloning in Arabidopsis. Why it feels good to have a genome initiative
working for you. Plant Physiol. 123: 795–805.
Manders, E.M.M., Verbeek, F.J., and Aten, J.A. (1993). Measure-
ment of co-localization of objects in dual-colour confocal images. J.
Microsc. 169: 375–382.
Marchler-Bauer, A., et al. (2015). CDD: NCBI’s conserved domain
database. Nucleic Acids Res. 43: D222–D226.
Mathur, J., Mathur, N., Kernebeck, B., and Hülskamp, M. (2003).
Mutations in actin-related proteins 2 and 3 affect cell shape de-
velopment in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 15: 1632–1645.
Müller, A., Guan, C., Gälweiler, L., Tänzler, P., Huijser, P.,
Marchant, A., Parry, G., Bennett, M., Wisman, E., and Palme,
K. (1998). AtPIN2 deﬁnes a locus of Arabidopsis for root gravi-
tropism control. EMBO J. 17: 6903–6911.
Nagawa, S., Xu, T., Lin, D., Dhonukshe, P., Zhang, X., Friml, J.,
Scheres, B., Fu, Y., and Yang, Z. (2012). ROP GTPase-dependent
actin microﬁlaments promote PIN1 polarization by localized in-
hibition
of
clathrin-dependent
endocytosis.
PLoS
Biol.
10:
e1001299.
Naoi, K., and Hashimoto, T. (2004). A semidominant mutation in an Ara-
bidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-like gene com-
promises cortical microtubule organization. Plant Cell 16: 1841–1853.
Naramoto, S., Otegui, M.S., Kutsuna, N., de Rycke, R., Dainobu, T.,
Karampelias, M., Fujimoto, M., Feraru, E., Miki, D., Fukuda, H.,
Nakano, A., and Friml, J. (2014). Insights into the localization and
function of the membrane trafﬁcking regulator GNOM ARF-GEF at
the Golgi apparatus in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 26: 3062–3076.
Nebenführ, A., Gallagher, L.A., Dunahay, T.G., Frohlick, J.A.,
Mazurkiewicz, A.M., Meehl, J.B., and Staehelin, L.A. (1999).
Stop-and-go movements of plant Golgi stacks are mediated by the
acto-myosin system. Plant Physiol. 121: 1127–1142.
Nelson, B.K., Cai, X., and Nebenführ, A. (2007). A multicolored set of
in vivo organelle markers for co-localization studies in Arabidopsis
and other plants. Plant J. 51: 1126–1136.
Nomura, K., Debroy, S., Lee, Y.H., Pumplin, N., Jones, J., and He,
S.Y. (2006). A bacterial virulence protein suppresses host innate
immunity to cause plant disease. Science 313: 220–223.
Nomura, K., Mecey, C., Lee, Y.-N., Imboden, L.A., Chang, J.H., and
He, S.Y. (2011). Effector-triggered immunity blocks pathogen
degradation of an immunity-associated vesicle trafﬁc regulator in
Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108: 10774–10779.
Pahari, S., Cormark, R.D., Blackshaw, M.T., Liu, C., Erickson, J.L.,
and
Schultz,
E.A.
(2014).
Arabidopsis
UNHINGED
encodes
a VPS51 homolog and reveals a role for the GARP complex in leaf
shape and vein patterning. Development 141: 1894–1905.
Papuga, J., Hoffmann, C., Dieterle, M., Moes, D., Moreau, F., Tholl,
S., Steinmetz, A., and Thomas, C. (2010). Arabidopsis LIM pro-
teins: a family of actin bundlers with distinct expression patterns
and modes of regulation. Plant Cell 22: 3034–3052.
Paredez, A.R., Persson, S., Ehrhardt, D.W., and Somerville, C.R. (2008).
Genetic evidence that cellulose synthase activity inﬂuences microtubule
cortical array organization. Plant Physiol. 147: 1723–1734.
Penn, O., Privman, E., Ashkenazy, H., Landan, G., Graur, D., and
Pupko, T. (2010). GUIDANCE: a web server for assessing alignment
conﬁdence scores. Nucleic Acids Res. 38: W23–W28.
Peremyslov, V.V., Morgun, E.A., Kurth, E.G., Makarova, K.S.,
Koonin, E.V., and Dolja, V.V. (2013). Identiﬁcation of myosin XI
receptors in Arabidopsis deﬁnes a distinct class of transport vesi-
cles. Plant Cell 25: 3022–3038.
Preuss, M.L., Serna, J., Falbel, T.G., Bednarek, S.Y., and Nielsen,
E. (2004). The Arabidopsis Rab GTPase RabA4b localizes to the tips
of growing root hair cells. Plant Cell 16: 1589–1603.
768
The Plant Cell

Qu, X., Zhang, H., Xie, Y., Wang, J., Chen, N., and Huang, S. (2013).
Arabidopsis villins promote actin turnover at pollen tube tips and
facilitate the construction of actin collars. Plant Cell 25: 1803–1817.
Renna, L., Stefano, G., Majeran, W., Micalella, C., Meinnel, T.,
Giglione, C., and Brandizzi, F. (2013). Golgi trafﬁc and integrity
depend on N-myristoyl transferase-1 in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 25:
1756–1773.
Richter, S., Voss, U., and Jürgens, G. (2009). Post-Golgi trafﬁc in
plants. Trafﬁc 10: 819–828.
Robert, S., Chary, S.N., Drakakaki, G., Li, S., Yang, Z., Raikhel,
N.V., and Hicks, G.R. (2008). Endosidin1 deﬁnes a compartment
involved in endocytosis of the brassinosteroid receptor BRI1 and
the auxin transporters PIN2 and AUX1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
105: 8464–8469.
Robinson, D.G., Jiang, L., and Schumacher, K. (2008). The endo-
somal system of plants: charting new and familiar territories. Plant
Physiol. 147: 1482–1492.
Rosado,
A.,
Schapire,
A.L.,
Bressan,
R.A.,
Harfouche,
A.L.,
Hasegawa, P.M., Valpuesta, V., and Botella, M.A. (2006). The
Arabidopsis tetratricopeptide repeat-containing protein TTL1 is re-
quired for osmotic stress responses and abscisic acid sensitivity.
Plant Physiol. 142: 1113–1126.
Sparkes, I., Runions, J., Hawes, C., and Grifﬁng, L. (2009). Move-
ment and remodeling of the endoplasmic reticulum in nondividing
cells of tobacco leaves. Plant Cell 21: 3937–3949.
Staiger, C.J., Sheahan, M.B., Khurana, P., Wang, X., McCurdy,
D.W., and Blanchoin, L. (2009). Actin ﬁlament dynamics are dom-
inated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabidopsis
cortical array. J. Cell Biol. 184: 269–280.
Stenzel, I., Ischebeck, T., König, S., Hołubowska, A., Sporysz, M.,
Hause, B., and Heilmann, I. (2008). The type B phosphatidylinositol-
4-phosphate 5-kinase 3 is essential for root hair formation in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 20: 124–141.
Stephan, O., Cottier, S., Fahlén, S., Montes-Rodriguez, A., Sun, J.,
Eklund, D.M., Klahre, U., and Kost, B. (2014). RISAP is a TGN-
associated RAC5 effector regulating membrane trafﬁc during polar
cell growth in tobacco. Plant Cell 26: 4426–4447.
Su, H., Zhu, J., Cai, C., Pei, W., Wang, J., Dong, H., and Ren, H.
(2012). FIMBRIN1 is involved in lily pollen tube growth by stabilizing
the actin fringe. Plant Cell 24: 4539–4554.
Sun, T., Li, S., and Ren, H. (2013). Proﬁlin as a regulator of the membrane-
actin cytoskeleton interface in plant cells. Front. Plant Sci. 4: 512.
Takano, J., Tanaka, M., Toyoda, A., Miwa, K., Kasai, K., Fuji, K.,
Onouchi, H., Naito, S., and Fujiwara, T. (2010). Polar localization
and degradation of Arabidopsis boron transporters through distinct
trafﬁcking pathways. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107: 5220–5225.
Takenawa, T., and Suetsugu, S. (2007). The WASP-WAVE protein
network: connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 8: 37–48.
Tamura, K., Stecher, G., Peterson, D., Filipski, A., and Kumar, S.
(2013). MEGA6: molecular evolutionary genetics analysis version
6.0. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30: 2725–2729.
Tanaka, H., Kitakura, S., De Rycke, R., De Groodt, R., and Friml, J.
(2009). Fluorescence imaging-based screen identiﬁes ARF GEF
component of early endosomal trafﬁcking. Curr. Biol. 19: 391–397.
Tanaka, H., Kitakura, S., Rakusová, H., Uemura, T., Feraru, M.I.,
De Rycke, R., Robert, S., Kakimoto, T., and Friml, J. (2013).
Cell polarity and patterning by PIN trafﬁcking through early en-
dosomal compartments in Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS Genet. 9:
e1003540.
Tanaka, H., Nodzyłski, T., Kitakura, S., Feraru, M.I., Sasabe, M.,
Ishikawa, T., Kleine-Vehn, J., Kakimoto, T., and Friml, J. (2014).
BEX1/ARF1A1C is required for BFA-sensitive recycling of PIN auxin
transporters and auxin-mediated development in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell Physiol. 55: 737–749.
Thole, J.M., Vermeer, J.E., Zhang, Y., Gadella, T.W., Jr., and
Nielsen, E. (2008). Root hair defective4 encodes a phosphatidylinositol-
4-phosphate phosphatase required for proper root hair development in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 20: 381–395.
Uemura, T., Suda, Y., Ueda, T., and Nakano, A. (2014). Dynamic
behavior of the trans-golgi network in root tissues of Arabidopsis
revealed by super-resolution live imaging. Plant Cell Physiol. 55:
694–703.
Uemura, T., Ueda, T., and Nakano, A. (2012). The physiological role
of SYP4 in the salinity and osmotic stress tolerances. Plant Signal.
Behav. 7: 1118–1120.
Vidali, L., Burkart, G.M., Augustine, R.C., Kerdavid, E., Tüzel, E.,
and Bezanilla, M. (2010). Myosin XI is essential for tip growth in
Physcomitrella patens. Plant Cell 22: 1868–1882.
Vidali, L., Rounds, C.M., Hepler, P.K., and Bezanilla, M. (2009).
Lifeact-mEGFP reveals a dynamic apical F-actin network in tip
growing plant cells. PLoS One 4: e5744.
Vincent, P., Chua, M., Nogue, F., Fairbrother, A., Mekeel, H., Xu, Y., Allen,
N., Bibikova, T.N., Gilroy, S., and Bankaitis, V.A. (2005). A Sec14p-
nodulin domain phosphatidylinositol transfer protein polarizes membrane
growth of Arabidopsis thaliana root hairs. J. Cell Biol. 168: 801–812.
Viotti, C., et al. (2010). Endocytic and secretory trafﬁc in Arabidopsis
merge in the trans-Golgi network/early endosome, an independent
and highly dynamic organelle. Plant Cell 22: 1344–1357.
Wang, P., Hawkins, T.J., Richardson, C., Cummins, I., Deeks, M.J.,
Sparkes, I., Hawes, C., and Hussey, P.J. (2014). The plant cyto-
skeleton, NET3C, and VAP27 mediate the link between the plasma
membrane and endoplasmic reticulum. Curr. Biol. 24: 1397–1405.
Wang, Y.S., Yoo, C.M., and Blancaﬂor, E.B. (2008). Improved im-
aging of actin ﬁlaments in transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing
a green ﬂuorescent protein fusion to the C- and N-termini of the
ﬁmbrin actin-binding domain 2. New Phytol. 177: 525–536.
Whippo, C.W., Khurana, P., Davis, P.A., DeBlasio, S.L., DeSloover,
D., Staiger, C.J., and Hangarter, R.P. (2011). THRUMIN1 is a light-
regulated actin-bundling protein involved in chloroplast motility.
Curr. Biol. 21: 59–64.
Yang, Y., Sage, T.L., Liu, Y., Ahmad, T.R., Marshall, W.F., Shiu,
S.-H., Froehlich, J.E., Imre, K.M., and Osteryoung, K.W. (2011).
CLUMPED CHLOROPLASTS 1 is required for plastid separation in
Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108: 18530–18535.
Yoo, C.M., Quan, L., Cannon, A.E., Wen, J., and Blancaﬂor, E.B.
(2012). AGD1, a class 1 ARF-GAP, acts in common signaling
pathways with phosphoinositide metabolism and the actin cyto-
skeleton in controlling Arabidopsis root hair polarity. Plant J. 69:
1064–1076.
Zhang, C., Kotchoni, S.O., Samuels, A.L., and Szymanski, D.B.
(2010). SPIKE1 signals originate from and assemble specialized
domains of the endoplasmic reticulum. Curr. Biol. 20: 2144–
2149.
Zhang, C., Mallery, E., Reagan, S., Boyko, V.P., Kotchoni, S.O., and
Szymanski, D.B. (2013). The endoplasmic reticulum is a reservoir
for WAVE/SCAR regulatory complex signaling in the Arabidopsis
leaf. Plant Physiol. 162: 689–706.
Zhang, M., Wang, C., Lin, Q., Liu, A., Wang, T., Feng, X., Liu, J.,
Han, H., Ma, Y., Bonea, D., Zhao, R., and Hua, X. (2015). A
tetratricopeptide repeat domain-containing protein SSR1 located
in mitochondria is involved in root development and auxin polar
transport in Arabidopsis. Plant J. 83: 582–599.
Zouhar, J., Rojo, E., and Bassham, D.C. (2009). AtVPS45 is a posi-
tive regulator of the SYP41/SYP61/VTI12 SNARE complex involved
in trafﬁcking of vacuolar cargo. Plant Physiol. 149: 1668–1678.
HLB1 in Functional Homeostasis of the Plant TGN/EE
769
