 
International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
HSFA2 Functions in the Physiological Adaptation of
Undifferentiated Plant Cells to Spaceﬂight
Agata K. Zupanska 1, Collin LeFrois 1, Robert J. Ferl 1,2 and Anna-Lisa Paul 1,*
1
Horticultural Science Department, Program in Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32611, USA; zupanska@live.com (A.K.Z.); clefrois@uﬂ.edu (C.L.); robferl@uﬂ.edu (R.J.F.)
2
Interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA
*
Correspondence: alp@uﬂ.edu; Tel.: +1-352-273-4855
Received: 21 November 2018; Accepted: 11 January 2019; Published: 17 January 2019


Abstract: Heat Shock Factor A2 (HsfA2) is part of the Heat Shock Factor (HSF) network, and plays an
essential role beyond heat shock in environmental stress responses and cellular homeostatic control.
Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures derived from wild type (WT) ecotype Col-0 and a knockout line
deﬁcient in the gene encoding HSFA2 (HSFA2 KO) were grown aboard the International Space Station
(ISS) to ascertain whether the HSF network functions in the adaptation to the novel environment
of spaceﬂight. Microarray gene expression data were analyzed using a two-part comparative
approach.
First, genes differentially expressed between the two environments (spaceﬂight to
ground) were identiﬁed within the same genotype, which represented physiological adaptation
to spaceﬂight. Second, gene expression proﬁles were compared between the two genotypes (HSFA2
KO to WT) within the same environment, which deﬁned genes uniquely required by each genotype
on the ground and in spaceﬂight-adapted states. Results showed that the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress and unfolded protein response (UPR) deﬁne the HSFA2 KO cells’ physiological state
irrespective of the environment, and likely resulted from a deﬁciency in the chaperone-mediated
protein folding machinery in the mutant. Results further suggested that additional to its universal
stress response role, HsfA2 also has speciﬁc roles in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight
through cell wall remodeling, signal perception and transduction, and starch biosynthesis. Disabling
HsfA2 altered the physiological state of the cells, and impacted the mechanisms induced to adapt
to spaceﬂight, and identiﬁed HsfA2-dependent genes that are important to the adaption of wild
type cells to spaceﬂight. Collectively these data indicate a non-thermal role for the HSF network in
spaceﬂight adaptation.
Keywords: spaceﬂight; Arabidopsis; plant cell culture; undifferentiated cells; microgravity; heat shock
1. Introduction
Survival in a challenging environment requires a coordinated system that enables a living
organism to respond appropriately to a change. The environment of the International Space Station
(ISS) presents novel challenges for all terrestrial organisms, which evolved in the unit gravity of Earth.
Microgravity is the most obvious challenge of spaceﬂight; however, other aspects of the spaceﬂight
environment, such as radiation from galactic cosmic rays and solar energetic particles, and vibration
contribute to the complexity of this novel environment. When terrestrial organisms are transported to
the ISS, they respond by adjusting metabolic processes to physiologically adapt to this new spaceﬂight
environment. One readout of the physiological changes induced by spaceﬂight is in the patterns of
gene expression. Plants are extremely sensitive to changes in their environment, and are particularity
attuned to changes in gravity. Individual genes have been implicated as important to the altered
gravity physiological adaptation through assays with deletion mutants [1,2] and with speciﬁc assays
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390; doi:10.3390/ijms20020390
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
2 of 36
of expression [3–7]. Genome-wide evaluations have also provided a large-scale view of the changes
elicited by disrupted terrestrial gravity environments [8–11].
Plants exhibit widespread changes in their patterns of gene expression in the absence of gravity,
such as in response to the spaceﬂight environment [4,12–24]. Even unicellular plants are capable of
sensing a change in the gravitational environment and there have been several spaceﬂight experiments
that examine the transcriptomes of single plant cells, and undifferentiated plants cells, which also
lack traditional gravity-sensing organs [4,19,25–28]. The wealth of information on the transcriptional
changes that accompany the adjustments to spaceﬂight begins to suggest common strategies for
adjusting to the spaceﬂight environment; however, the underlying question of why certain genes
are necessary remains unanswered. One group of genes strongly represented in many spaceﬂight
transcriptomes is composed of the heat shock transcription factors and proteins that comprise the Heat
Shock Factor network [15,19].
Heat Shock Factors (HSFs) are transcription factors that activate the expression of genes in
response to almost any environmental stress and are essential to the cellular homeostatic control
mechanisms (for review, please see [29]). HSF genes are evolutionarily conserved and are represented
in the genomes of almost every organism. Given the conservation of the HSF network and its general
roles in stress responses, it was perhaps not surprising to see HSFs represented in the response to
spaceﬂight in plants. Their particularly strong representation in cell cultures; however, suggested
HSFs could play a unique role in the spaceﬂight response of undifferentiated cells [4].
One hallmark of cellular stress is the accumulation of denatured proteins. The main gene
targets of HSF-induced transcriptional activation are the stress response proteins that act as molecular
chaperones [29–32]. These chaperones not only protect a cell from denatured protein accumulation,
but also assure proper protein folding and maturation of newly synthesized proteins indispensable in
response to stress. The Heat Shock Proteins (HSPs) are the main chaperones of the folding machinery,
but there are also other non-chaperone proteins assisting in efﬁcient protein maturation [33–35].
For instance, a pair of enzymes, including a disulﬁde carrier protein (protein disulﬁde isomerase,
PDI), and a disulﬁde-generating enzyme (endoplasmic oxidoreductin-1, ERO1 and protein disulﬁde
isomerase, PDI, PDIs/ERO1) catalyze oxidative protein folding by creating disulﬁde bonds, thereby
assisting in proper protein sorting [36,37].
Protein folding occurs within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which also serves as the main hub
for the secretory pathways and protein delivery to their ﬁnal destinations. The ER uses an extensive
surveillance called the Endoplasmic Reticulum Quality Control (ERQC) system, which assures that
only properly folded proteins exit the ER and maintains proper physiological homeostasis in the
ER [38]. When there is an accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER, a stress signal is emitted.
Initially, a cell activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) intended to increase the ER folding
capacity in an attempt to refold the aberrant proteins [39,40]. If these UPR solutions to the unfolded
protein accumulation problem fail, or if the accumulation of misfolded proteins is massive, then the
ﬁnal UPR step—the endoplasmic reticulum associated degradation (ERAD)—is activated. The ERAD
eliminates and destroys the misfolded proteins via proteasome digestion, preventing further protein
aggregation. The luminal lectin OS9 in cooperation with a membrane spanning protein SEL1/HRD3
recognizes the unfolded glycosylated proteins which are then ubiquitinylated by the HRD1 E3
ligase, removed from the ER lumen, and degraded by the 26S proteasome in the cytoplasm [41,42].
Taken collectively, ER homeostasis works as a sensor for environmental stimuli, and the ER stress signal
initiates a subcellular stress response system that can secure protein homeostasis during environmental
changes [43,44].
The HsfA2 gene is a member of the large family of Hsf genes in the HSF network and is a key
regulator of the defense response via HSP chaperone transcriptional activation to several types of
environmental stresses, namely extreme temperatures (high and low), hydrogen peroxide, and high
light intensity [45–47]. The HSFA2 protein has been demonstrated itself to be the main coordinator
of the UPR during heat stress [48]. The critical involvement of HSFA2 in the response to extreme

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
3 of 36
environments makes it an excellent target candidate for studying the effects of spaceﬂight on plants and
to test if plants use the same universal stress response mechanism evolved terrestrially to accommodate
the novel space gravitational environment.
HSFA2 may also have an additional role in the physiological adaptation to the spaceﬂight
environment beyond the UPR induction of the chaperone-based protein folding machinery. The genes
encoding HSFs and HSPs were reported to be upregulated in spaceﬂight in many biological
systems [26,49]. The HsfA2 gene speciﬁcally was the highest upregulated gene in the wild type
Arabidopsis cell cultures after 12 days in space [4,19]. Moreover, HSFA2 was shown to function in
ampliﬁcation of the signal in response to brassinosteroids, calcium, and auxin and was reported
to be affected in Arabidopsis in spaceﬂight, and therefore has the potential for playing a role in the
gravity sensing signal transduction cascade [13,20,50]. In the unicellular yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae),
the HSF targets represent nearly 3% of the genome and the diversity of their functions supports a
broad role for HSF in coordinating the multitude of cellular processes occurring in normal and stressful
conditions [51]. Since the HSFs play a role in various cellular processes such as development, cellular
lifespan, cell differentiation and proliferation, the likelihood that HSFA2 will play some role in the
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight increases [52,53].
Cell lines from wild type (WT) Col-0 and an HsfA2 knockout (HSFA2 KO) in the same Col-0
background were launched to the International Space Station (ISS) for the Cellular Expression Logic
(CEL) experiment, which was a component of the Biological Research In Cannisters 17 (BRIC17)
payload. The experiments here compare samples ﬁxed in orbit after growth in space to samples
grown on the ground. Descriptions and discussions will consider not only the spaceﬂight adaptation
experience for each genotype, but also the gene expression proﬁles in the ground and spaceﬂight
environments between genotypes. It was our goal to develop a better understanding of how cells,
disabled in a primary regulator of environmental stress response, react to an unfamiliar environment
outside of their evolutionary experience. The results of the spaceﬂight experiment presented here have
enhanced our understanding not only of HSFA2’s role in adjusting to novel environments, but also the
broader scope of the processes involved spaceﬂight physiological adaptation in plant cells.
2. Results
In this experiment, the pattern of gene expression that deﬁned the adapted state was established
after ten days of growth in the BRIC hardware in two environments: spaceﬂight, and ground control
in the two genotypes: HSFA2 KO, and WT. Cell clusters of both genotypes were applied in comparable
density for both treatments, and continued growth in the spaceﬂight and ground control environments
(Figure 1).
Microarray gene expression data were analyzed in two dimensions. The ﬁrst or “vertical”
dimension of the analysis involved the typical comparison of the gene expression proﬁles of the
cells grown in spaceﬂight to those grown on the ground for each of the two cell lines (see red box in
Figure 2A, and refer also to [28] for a similar experimental design). For clarity, this vertical comparison
was termed the physiological adaptation to the spaceﬂight environment of either HSFA2 KO or
WT cells. Genes identiﬁed in this vertical comparison contribute to understanding which cellular
processes were sensitive to spaceﬂight in each genotype. The second or “horizontal” dimension of the
analysis involved comparison of gene expression proﬁles between the two genotypes within the same
environment: ground (see green box of Figure 2A) and spaceﬂight (see blue box of Figure 2A). In the
ground horizontal comparison, gene expression in HSFA2 KO cells on the ground was compared to
gene expression in WT cells on the ground, thus deﬁning unique genes of the ground adapted state
for each genotype. Similarly, in a spaceﬂight horizontal comparison, the gene expression in HSFA2
KO cells in spaceﬂight was compared to gene expression in WT cells in spaceﬂight, thus deﬁning
unique genes required for the spaceﬂight adapted state in each genotype. Finally, the sets of genes
obtained from a comparison of the ﬁrst and second dimension were analyzed together, and their
interdependence was examined.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
4 of 36
Figure 1. The BRIC hardware and cells ﬂown in the BRIC17 CEL (Cellular Expression Logic) experiment.
(A) A single BRIC (Biological Research in Canisters) hardware unit, showing ﬁve PDFUs (Petri Dish
Fixation Unit) and a slot for a HOBO™data logger; (B) A single PDFU containing a Petri dish of
Arabidopsis callus cells; (C) Examples of replicate plates of wild type and HSFA2 KO cells from the
spaceﬂight and ground control prior to loading into the PDFUs, along with representative photos of
the ﬁxed cells post-ﬂight.
The gene expression datasets were abbreviated as follows: Ground Control WT (GWt), Ground
Control HSFA2 KO (GHsf), Spaceﬂight WT (FWt) and Spaceﬂight HSFA2 KO (FHsf).
The WT
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight was identiﬁed in the FWt : GWt comparison group (see red box
on the left in Figure 2A), the HSFA2 KO physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight was identiﬁed in the
FHsf : GHsf comparison group (red box on the right in Figure 2A), the genotypic adaptation to ground
was identiﬁed in the GHsf : GWt comparison group (see green box at the bottom in Figure 2A), and the
genotypic adaptation to spaceﬂight was identiﬁed in the FHsf : FWt comparison group (blue box on top
in Figure 2A). The genes that were differentially expressed in these comparisons are outlined in the
following sections in terms of the numbers of differentially expressed genes represented in general

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
5 of 36
ontology categories. Full annotations of the genes in each category are presented in Appendix A
Tables A1 and A2.
 
Figure 2. Graphical presentation of the dimensions used in the microarray data analysis and the results
of thereof. (A) HSFA2 KO and WT mark the gene expression proﬁles for respective cell samples. Solid
arrows represent the direction of comparison of the gene expression proﬁles. Red box and arrows
indicate the ﬁrst dimension of data analysis—gene expression proﬁles of spaceﬂight-adapted state to
ground-adapted state for each of the two cell lines, thereby characterizing the physiological adaptation
of each genotype to spaceﬂight. Green box and arrow indicate part of the second dimension of data
analysis—a comparison of gene expression proﬁles between the two genotypes in the ground-adapted
state, thereby deﬁning the genes uniquely required by the two genotypes for ground-adapted state.
Blue box and arrow indicate part of the second dimension of data analysis—a comparison of gene
expression proﬁles between the two genotypes during spaceﬂight-adapted state, thereby deﬁning
the genes uniquely required by the two genotypes for spaceﬂight-adapted state; (B) A proportional
graphical presentation of the signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes identiﬁed in each comparison
group: 78 genes of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells obtained from FWt : GWT;
221 genes of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells obtained from FHsf : GHsf;
349 genes of the ground-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from GHsf : GWt
group; 220 genes of the spaceﬂight-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from
FHsf : FWt.
2.1. The HsfA2 Expression Levels across Samples
The raw gene expression values in microarrays, measured as a ﬂuorescence signal intensity,
showed that the HsfA2 transcript was abundant in the WT undifferentiated cells in the ground control
samples. The average raw expression of the HsfA2 gene in the 4 biological replicates of the WT ground
control cells was 4171 (see Figure S1 in the Supplementary Material). In contrast, the average raw
HsfA2 gene expression in the 3 biological replicates of the HSFA2 KO ground control cells was only
39. Thus, there was a deﬁcit of −7.27 log2 Fold Change (P-value 2.9 × 10−9) of the HsfA2 transcript in
HSFA2 KO cells than in WT cells on the ground, demonstrating that the T-DNA insertion mutation
severely depressed HsfA2 expression.
There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference in the HsfA2 expression levels between spaceﬂight
and corresponding ground control for either the WT cells or the HSFA2 KO cells (see Figure S1 in the
Supplementary Material).
2.2. Different Genes Characterize the Physiological Adaptation of the WT and HSFA2 KO Cells to Spaceﬂight
2.2.1. The Genes Characterizing the Physiological Adaptation of WT Cells to Spaceﬂight—FWt : GWt
The genes involved in physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells were identiﬁed by
comparing the gene expression proﬁles in WT spaceﬂight cells (FWt) to the WT ground control
cells (GWt) in the FWt : GWt group comparison (see Figure 2A). There were 78 genes signiﬁcantly
differentially expressed between spaceﬂight and ground control at P-value < 0.01 and log2 Fold
Change > 1; 46 genes were upregulated and 32 genes were downregulated (see Figure 2B, Figure 3,

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
6 of 36
File S1 GO 78 FWtGWt in the Supplementary Material). The microarray data are publicly available
from GEO (GSE95388) and GeneLab (number TBD).
Figure 3. Heat map visualizing the expression of signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes: 78 genes
of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells obtained from the FWt : GWt group comparison,
and 221 genes of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells obtained from the FHsf :
GHsf group comparison.
The upregulated genes identiﬁed from the FWt : GWt group comparison represented genes that
were overexpressed in WT cells in spaceﬂight compared to the WT cells on the ground. These genes
primarily fell under two GO terms of biological process ontology: response to stimulus (GO:0050896)
and regulation of biological processes (GO:0050789). Many of these genes are associated with defense,
wounding, and cell wall metabolism (Table A1).
The downregulated genes identiﬁed from FWt : GWt group comparison represented genes that
were downregulated in WT cells in spaceﬂight compared to the WT cells on the ground. These genes
primarily fell under the regulation of biological process GO term (GO:0050789) and under the categories
of endomembrane systems (GO:0012505) and Golgi associated (GO:0005794). Many of these genes are
associated with cellular transport and receptors (Table A1).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
7 of 36
2.2.2. HSFA2 KO Cells Changed the Expression of Three Times More Genes than Seen in WT
Cells—FHsf : GHsf
The genes involved in physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells were identiﬁed
by comparing the gene expression proﬁles in HSFA2 KO spaceﬂight cells (FHsf) to HSFA2 KO ground
control cells (GHsf) in the FHsf : GHsf group comparison (see Figure 2A). There were 221 genes
signiﬁcantly differentially expressed between spaceﬂight and ground control at P-value < 0.01 and
log2 Fold Change > 1; 112 genes were upregulated, and 109 genes were downregulated (see Figure 2B,
Figure 3, File S2 GO 221 FHsfGHsf in the Supplementary Material).
The upregulated genes identiﬁed from FHsf : GHsf group comparison represented genes that
were overexpressed in HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight compared to the HSFA2 KO cells on the ground.
These genes primarily fell under 3 GO terms of biological process ontology: the defense response
genes to other organism (GO:0098542), including response to wounding, cellular response to sucrose
starvation (GO:0043617) and valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation (GO:0009083) (see Table A1).
The downregulated genes identiﬁed from FHsf : GHsf group comparison represented genes that
were underexpressed in HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight compared to the HSFA2 KO cells on the
ground. These genes primarily fell under 2 GO terms of biological process ontology: closely related
growth, developmental process (GO:0032502) and anatomical structure morphogenesis (GO:0009653),
particularly those involved in cell elongation, cell wall loosening, and multidimensional cell growth.
These downregulated genes also fell under 2 GO terms of the cellular component ontology: plant-type
cell wall (GO:0009505) and plasma membrane (GO:0005886) (see Table A1).
2.3. WT and HSFA2 KO Show More Difference in Gene Expression Proﬁles in Their Ground-Adapted State
than in Spaceﬂight-Adapted State
2.3.1. Genotype Speciﬁc Genes of the Ground-Adapted State—GHsf : GWt
Comparison of the gene expression proﬁles of the ground-adapted states between the HSFA2
KO and WT cells shows the consequences of the HsfA2 gene loss for cells in the ground environment.
The genes differentially expressed in the ground-adapted state between HSFA2 KO cells and WT
cells were identiﬁed by comparing the gene expression proﬁles in HSFA2 KO ground cells (GHsf)
to WT ground control cells (GWt) in the GHsf : GWt group comparison (see Figure 2). There were
349 genes signiﬁcantly differentially expressed between WT and HSFA2 KO cells in the ground-adapted
state at P-value < 0.01 and log2 Fold Change > 1; 115 genes were upregulated and 234 genes were
downregulated (see Figure 2B, Figure 4, File S3 GO 349 GHsfGWt in the Supplementary Material).
Genotypes in ground-adapted state displayed the greatest differences in gene expression proﬁles than
in any other comparison group. Thirty-three percent of genes had an enhanced expression in the
ground-adapted state in HSFA2 KO cells compared to WT cells, and 67% had diminished expression
(see Figure S2 in the Supplementary Material).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
8 of 36
Figure 4. Heat map visualizing the expression of signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes: 349 genes
of the ground-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from GHsf : GWt group
comparison and 220 genes of the spaceﬂight-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained
from FHsf : FWt group comparison.
In the HSFA2 KO and WT ground-adapted state, the upregulated genes identiﬁed from the
GHsf : GWt group comparison represented genes that were overexpressed in cells disabled in HSFA2
KO on the ground compared to WT cells on the ground. These genes primarily fell under multiple
GO terms of biological process ontology: response to stimulus (GO:0050896) and defense response
to other organism (GO:0098542), particularly to: nematode, fungus, bacterium and to wounding,
water deprivation (GO:0009414) related to high salinity, response to endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER
stress) (GO:0034976) and unfolded protein response (UPR) (GO:0006986) and response to misfolded
protein (GO:0051788), localization (GO:0051179), transport (GO:0006810), establishment of localization
(GO:0051234) (see Table A2).
In the HSFA2 KO and WT ground-adapted state, the downregulated genes identiﬁed from the
GHsf : GWt group comparison represented genes that were underexpressed in cells disabled in HSFA2
KO on the ground compared to WT cells on the ground. These genes primarily fell under multiple
GO terms of biological process ontology: response to stimulus (GO:0050896) and response to stress
(GO:0006950), including chaperones and non-chaperones, response to oxidative stress (GO:0006979),
response to reactive oxygen species (GO:0000302), response to hydrogen peroxide (GO:0042542),
response to sucrose stimulus (GO:0009744) and cellular amino acid and derivative metabolic process
(GO:0006519), such as biosynthesis of phenylalanine, asparagine, tryptophan and ﬂavonoid (see
Table A2).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
9 of 36
2.3.2. Genotype Speciﬁc Genes of the Spaceﬂight-Adapted State—FHsf : FWt
A comparison of the gene expression proﬁles of spaceﬂight-adapted states between the HSFA2
KO and WT cells shows cells’ adaptation to spaceﬂight environment if the HSFA2 function was
disabled. Thus, these genes indicate the genotypic adaptation to spaceﬂight. The genes differentially
expressed in the spaceﬂight-adapted state between HSFA2 KO cells and WT cells were identiﬁed
by comparing the gene expression proﬁles in HSFA2 KO spaceﬂight cells (FHsf) to WT spaceﬂight
cells (FWt) in the FHsf : FWt group comparison (see Figure 2A). There were 220 genes signiﬁcantly
differentially expressed between HSFA2 KO and WT cell samples in spaceﬂight (see Figure 2B, Figure 4,
File S4 GO 220 FHsfFWt in the Supplementary Material). The 95 genes were more highly expressed
in HSFA2 KO cells than in WT cells in spaceﬂight, while 125 genes were downregulated in HSFA2
KO cells as compared to WT cells in spaceﬂight. In the HSFA2 KO and WT spaceﬂight-adapted
state, the upregulated genes identiﬁed from the FHsf : FWt group comparison, represented genes that
were overexpressed in cells disabled in HsfA2 in spaceﬂight compared to WT cells in spaceﬂight.
These genes primarily fell under multiple GO terms of biological process ontology: defense response
to other organism (GO:0098542), response to topologically incorrect protein (GO:0035966), response
to unfolded protein (UPR) (GO:0006986) and endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD)
(GO:0036503), as well as protein localization (GO:0008104), establishment of protein localization
(GO:0045184), protein transport (GO:0015031), vesicle-mediated transport (GO:0016192), transport
(GO:0006810), establishment of localization (GO:0051234), including protein processing in endoplasmic
reticulum, ER to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport and secondary metabolic process (GO:0019748) (see
Table A2). Additionally, these upregulated genes represented plasma membrane GO term (GO:0005886)
including plasma membrane receptor kinases of the cellular component ontology (see Table A2).
In the HSFA2 KO and WT spaceﬂight-adapted state, the downregulated genes identiﬁed from the
FHsf : FWt group comparison represented genes that were underexpressed in cells disabled in HsfA2
in spaceﬂight compared to WT cells in spaceﬂight. These genes primarily fell under 3 GO terms of
cellular compartment ontology: cell wall (GO:0005618), external encapsulating structure (GO:0030312)
including xylem development, cell wall macromolecule metabolic process, plastid (GO:0009536) and
energy reserve metabolic process (GO:0006112) including starch biosynthetic process (GO:0019252)
(see Table A2).
2.4. Occurrence of Individual Genes and Gene Function Across Collective Comparisons of Physiological
Adaptation, Ground and Spaceﬂight-Adapted States
2.4.1. In the Response to Spaceﬂight, There Were Only Four Differentially Expressed Genes
Represented in Both the WT and HSFA2 KO Comparisons (FWt : GWt to FHsf : GHsf)
When the 78 differentially expressed genes in the FWt : GWt group comparison were compared to
the 221 genes differentially expressed in the FHsf : GHsf group comparison, only one gene changed
in the exact same way, At2g03760, which encodes a putative steroid sulfotransferase (see Figure 3,
Figure 5A, File S5 Gene lists in the Supplementary Material). At2g03760 was upregulated in spaceﬂight
cells relative to their ground counterparts in both cell lines.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
10 of 36
Figure 5. The heat map visualization of the selected signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes
arranged by a speciﬁc expression patterns in the four comparison groups FWt : GWt, FHsf : GHsf,
GHsf : GWt, FHsf : FWt. A through F designate a category for respective expression pattern. (A) genes
were selected by presence among the physiological adaptation genes: 4 genes shared by the 78 of the
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells obtained from FWt : GWt group comparison and
221 genes of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells obtained from FHsf : GHsf
group comparison; (B) genes were selected by presence among the ground and spaceﬂight-adapted
state genes: 28 genes that showed the same differential expression pattern in the ground-adapted state
between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from GHsf : GWt group and in the spaceﬂight-adapted
state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from FHsf : FWt; (C) genes were selected by presence
among the WT physiological adaptation and ground-adapted state genes: 10 genes that showed the
same differential expression pattern in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells obtained
from FWt : GWt comparison group and the ground-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells
obtained from GHsf : GWt group. These genes were categorized as Required; (D) Genes were selected

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
11 of 36
by presence among the HSFA2 KO physiological adaptation and ground-adapted state genes: 66 genes
that showed opposite differential expression pattern in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight
in HSFA2 KO cells obtained from FHsf : GHsf comparison group and the ground-adapted state
between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from GHsf : GWt group. These genes were categorized
as Corrected; (E) Genes were selected by presence among the WT physiological adaptation and
spaceﬂight-adapted state genes: 7 genes that showed the opposite differential expression pattern in the
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells obtained from FWt : GWt comparison group and the
spaceﬂight-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from FHsf : FWt group. These genes
were categorized as HsfA2-dependent. In addition, reﬂect WT genotypic adaptation; (F) genes were
selected by presence among the HSFA2 KO physiological adaptation and spaceﬂight-adapted state
genes: 53 genes that showed the same differential expression pattern in the physiological adaptation to
spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells obtained from FHsf : GHsf comparison group and the spaceﬂight-adapted
state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells obtained from FHsf : FWt group. These genes were categorized
as Compensated, and reﬂect HSFA2 KO genotypic adaptation.
Two of the genes differentially expressed in spaceﬂight for both HSFA2 KO and WT cells were
expressed in opposite directions. During spaceﬂight, these genes were upregulated in WT cells,
while being down regulated HSFA2 KO cells (see Figure 5A, File S5 Gene lists in the Supplementary
Material). These genes were: At3g10400-RNA recognition motif, and CCHC-type zinc ﬁnger domain
containing protein and At4g03570-Cystatin/monellin superfamily protein. However, these two
genes showed signiﬁcant differential expressions in ground-adapted state between HSFA2 KO
and WT cells, being overexpressed in HSFA2 KO cells relative to WT cells. The genes were not
differentially expressed in the spaceﬂight-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells. Therefore,
although the genes seemed to be engaged conversely in the physiological adaptation in two cell lines,
their expression adjustments in either HSFA2 KO or WT cells resulted in no different expression level
in spaceﬂight-adapted state. The differential expression level on the ground caused HSFA2 KO cells
to diminish the expression of these genes, and WT cells to increase in the physiological adaptation
to spaceﬂight.
One additional gene was expressed in opposite directions in response to spaceﬂight.
At4g02460-PMS1 DNA mismatch repair protein was upregulated in WT and downregulated in HSFA2
KO cells (see Figure 5A, File S5 Gene lists in the Supplementary Material).
2.4.2. Only 28 Genes Differentially Expressed Between the Two Genotypes in the Ground-Adapted
State were also Differentially Expressed in the Spaceﬂight-Adapted State (GHsf : GWt to FHsf : FWt)
When the 349 genes differentially expressed in the GHsf : GWt group comparison were juxtaposed
to the 220 genes of differentially expressed in the FHsf : FWt group comparison, only 28 genes showed
the same differential expression (see Figure 4, Figure 5B).
Among
these
genes
were
those
representing
response
to
toxic
substance
ontology
(At2g29490-ATGSTU1 glutathione S-transferase tau 1, At2g29470-ATGSTU3 glutathione S-transferase
tau 3, At1g17170-ATGSTU24 glutathione S-transferase tau 24), and transport, establishment
of localization,
and localization (At3g44340-CEF ER to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport,
At1g29310-SecY protein transport family protein, At1g78570-RHM1 RHAMNOSE BIOSYNTHESIS 1
dTDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase, At1g71140-MATE efﬂux family protein, At5g54860-Major facilitator
superfamily protein).
2.4.3. Required and Corrected Genes for the Spaceﬂight-Adapted State
Some genes differentially expressed in the ground-adapted state between WT and HSFA2 KO
were involved in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT or HSFA2 KO cells. The differential
expression of the 349 genes expressed in the ground-adapted state, the GHsf : GWt group comparison,
was assessed in the WT physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight, the FWt : GWt comparison group,
and in the HSFA2 KO physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight, the FHsf : GHsf comparison group.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
12 of 36
If the gene differentially expressed between the ground-adapted states in genotypes participated
in the physiological adaptation of the WT cells but not of HSFA2 KO cells, then it was deﬁned as
required. For a gene to be required it had to meet these criteria:
•
WT cells changed the expression of the gene in spaceﬂight compared to ground control.
•
WT cells differentially expressed the gene on the ground compared to HSFA2 KO cells on
the ground.
•
HSFA2 KO cells did not change the gene’s expression in spaceﬂight compared to ground control.
•
However, the level of expression of the gene in WT spaceﬂight was similar to the expression of
the gene in HSFA2 KO in spaceﬂight.
Therefore, required genes are those whose expression levels in WT cells in spaceﬂight match
the expression in HSFA2 KO in spaceﬂight.
HSFA2 KO cells already have the space-adapted
expression level. There were 10 genes that met these criteria (see Figure 5C, File S5 Gene lists in
the Supplementary Material).
If the gene differentially expressed between the ground-adapted states in genotypes participated
in the physiological adaptation of the HSFA2 KO cells but not of the WT cells, then it was deﬁned as
corrected. For a gene to be classiﬁed as corrected it needed to meet these criteria:
•
HSFA2 KO cells changed the expression of the gene in spaceﬂight compared to ground control.
•
HSFA2 KO cells differentially expressed the corrected gene on the ground compared to WT cells
on the ground.
•
WT cells did not change the corrected gene expression in spaceﬂight compared to ground control.
•
However, the level of expression of the gene in HSFA2 KO in spaceﬂight is similar to the expression
level of the gene in WT in spaceﬂight.
Therefore, corrected genes are those whose expression levels in HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight
match the WT expression levels in spaceﬂight. These are genes that HSFA2 KO differentially expressed
to match WT levels in order to adapt to spaceﬂight. These genes would not be revealed in an
examination of WT cells alone. There were 66 genes that met these criteria (see Figure 5D, File S5 Gene
lists in the Supplementary Material). Thus, these 66 genes were considered to be corrected in the HSFA2
KO physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in that their expression levels were returned to WT levels
in order adapt to spaceﬂight. Only 5 genes out of 66 were overexpressed in HSFA2 KO cells on the
ground relative to WT cell on the ground and thus were downregulated in the HSFA2 KO physiological
adaptation to spaceﬂight to even the WT expression level in the spaceﬂight-adapted state. The 61 genes
showed diminished expression on the ground in HSFA2 KO cells relative to WT cells on the ground,
but were upregulated during spaceﬂight to match the WT expression level in the spaceﬂight-adapted
state. These 5 genes included: At3g44800-Meprin and TRAF (MATH) homology domain-containing
protein of unknown function, At5g52260-myb19 a transcription factor, At2g35340-MEE29 maternal
effect embryo arrest 29, At2g46960-CYP709B1 cytochrome P450 functioning in oxidation-reduction
processes, and At5g15350-ENODL17 early nodulin-like protein 17 associated with cell wall pectin
metabolic process. The 61 genes included genes associated with: response to wounding, mechanical
stress, cell wall, valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, as well as transmembrane transporter and
nitrate transporters genes (see Appendix A Table A3).
2.4.4. Genotypic-Speciﬁc Spaceﬂight-Adapted State
A comparison of the spaceﬂight gene expression patterns between the two genotypes
revealed 220 differentially expressed genes between WT and HSFA2 KO. The expression of these
220 differentially expressed in the spaceﬂight-adapted state (FHsf : FWt) was compared to the WT
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight, the FWt : GWt comparison group, and the HSFA2 KO
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight, the FHsf : GHsf comparison group.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
13 of 36
HsfA2-Dependent Genes in the WT Genotypic Spaceﬂight Adaptation
In the vertical comparison between spaceﬂight and ground gene expression patterns, there were
7 genes differentially expressed in WT that were not differentially expressed in HSFA2 KO cells.
These genes were not differentially expressed between WT and HSFA2 KO in the ground-adapted state,
but were differentially expressed between genotypes in the spaceﬂight-adapted state (see Figure 5E,
File S5 Gene lists in the Supplementary Material). Thus, these genes were HsfA2-dependent, as they
were adapted to the spaceﬂight level only if the HsfA2 gene was functional. These genes represent the
WT genotypic adaptation to spaceﬂight.
All genes but one (At4g07960-ATCSLC12 Cellulose-synthase-like C12 localized to Golgi apparatus,
plasmodesma), were downregulated in the WT physiological adaptation and resulted in the higher
expression in spaceﬂight-adapted state in HSFA2 KO than in WT cells.
These 6 genes were:
At5g19070-SNARE associated Golgi protein family involved in proline transport and localized to
plasma membrane, At1g78980-SRF5 STRUBBELIG-receptor family 5 functioning in transmembrane
receptor protein tyrosine kinase signaling pathway and localized to extracellular region, two genes,
At1g66640-RNI-like superfamily protein and At2g36560-AT hook motif DNA-binding family protein,
localized to nucleus, and At2g43240-Nucleotide-sugar transporter and At1g32830-transposable element
gene (see Table A3).
Compensated Genes for Disabled HsfA2 in the HSFA2 KO Spaceﬂight Adaptation
In the vertical comparison of gene expression patterns between spaceﬂight and ground controls
for WT and HSFA2 KO cells, there were 53 genes differentially expressed in HSFA2 KO that were
not differentially expressed in WT. As with the HsfA2-dependent genes described above, these genes
were not differentially expressed between the two genotypes in the ground-adapted state, but were
differentially expressed between genotypes in the spaceﬂight-adapted state (see Figure 5F, File S5
Gene lists in the Supplementary Material). These 53 genes were differentially expressed in the
spaceﬂight-adapted state because HSFA2 KO cells engaged these genes in the physiological adaptation
to spaceﬂight, while the WT cells did not. Thus, these genes compensated for the lack of functional
HsfA2 gene. These genes represent the HSFA2 KO genotypic adaptation to spaceﬂight.
There were 6 genes out of the 53 which were upregulated in the physiological adaptation to
spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells which resulted in the higher expression level in spaceﬂight-adapted
state in HSFA2 KO cells than in WT cells. These genes were associated with ER stress, UPR and
vesicle-mediated transport (see Table A3).
The remaining 49 genes were all downregulated
in the HSFA2 KO physiological adaptation and exhibited diminished expression level in the
spaceﬂight-adapted state in spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO relative to WT cells. These genes included
genes associated with intra-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport and calcium pump (see Table A3).
3. Discussion
Undifferentiated Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures were ﬂown to the ISS as part of the BRIC17
CEL experiment to enhance the understanding of how cells lacking HSFA2, a key transcription factor
involved in the response to terrestrial stress stimuli, physiologically adapt to the novel environment of
spaceﬂight. The WT cells and the cells disabled in expression of the HsfA2 gene both survived their
orbits in the ISS, indicating that they both had adapted their physiology to the novel environment
despite their genotypic differences. Cells disabled in HSFA2 function used substantially more and
substantially different gene expression proﬁles to achieve a spaceﬂight-adapted state compared to
WT cells. This observation leads to a remarkable conclusion about the role of the HSF network in
the entire adaptation processes to spaceﬂight—proﬁcient spaceﬂight adaptation requires a functional
HSF network.
This conclusion suggests that various aspects of HSFA2 and the HSF network illuminate important
components of spaceﬂight adaptation in plant cells.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
14 of 36
3.1. Universal and Speciﬁc Aspects of the HSFA2 Role in the Adaptation to Spaceﬂight
Inevitably, the physiological adaptation to a change in the environment, including the novel
change of ground to spaceﬂight, requires de novo protein synthesis followed by protein maturation
and transport. Therefore, when a population of cells transitions to the spaceﬂight environment,
the demands on a cell to synthesize and mature new proteins manifests in a unique manner. Unlike WT
cells, the HSFA2 KO cells activated the UPR as part of a strategy to adapt to spaceﬂight, implicating
that the ability to fold proteins adequately was compromised in the HSFA2 KO cells. As previously
observed at the molecular level in response to a multitude of other environmental stimuli, HSFA2 was
likely working to secure cellular protein homeostasis, and the inefﬁciency in protein folding observed
in space ﬂown HSFA2 KO cells likely resulted from the limited HSFA2-governed regulation of
molecular chaperone genes. For instance, the PDI gene, ATPDIL2-3 (At2g32920), the transcription
factors WRKY33 (At2g38470), and AtGATA-1 (At3g24050) along with four other genes (Ypt/Rab-GAP
domain of gyp1p superfamily protein (At3g49350), SAG21 (At4g02380), transmembrane proteins
14c (At1g50740), and unknown (At1g19020)), all of which were reported to be a part of the UPR,
were tuniquely abundant in the HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight [40]. Moreover, the pivotal gene of
the ERAD, HRD3A (At1g18260), also showed enhanced expression in HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight
conditions, demonstrating activation of the destruction pathway for aberrant proteins. These results
cumulatively suggest that the HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight suffered from excessive aggregation of
misfolded proteins and that to get rid of these misfolded and cumbersome aggregates, a degradation
pathway was upregulated in order to actively remove them.
Additionally, the genes of intracellular protein transport and secretion, such as Transducin/WD40
repeat-like superfamily protein (AT1G18830) alias SEC31-like protein transporter, target SNARE
coiled-coil domain protein (AT1G29060) and the Coatomer beta subunit (AT3G15980), which functions
speciﬁcally in ER to Golgi vesicle-mediated transport, were also upregulated in HSFA2 KO cells relative
to WT cells in the spaceﬂight-adapted state [54]. The ATARFA1D (AT1G70490) gene coding Ras-related
small GTP-binding family protein, known to be essential for vesicle coating and un-coating [55],
was also upregulated in space-ﬂown HSFA2 KO cells. This suggests that the protein sorting and
delivery processes were impaired in space ﬂown HSFA2 KO cells and that the over-induction of
multiple vesicle-mediated protein transport genes was an attempt to circumvent an inefﬁcient system
of intracellular protein trafﬁcking. As such, HSFA2 plays a role in processes involved when a
cell physiologically adapts to spaceﬂight similar to its role as a universal coordinator of the stress
response when plants adapt to a broad range of other environmental changes (see Figure 6). However,
the expression patterns in the spaceﬂight-adapted state of the genes related to cell wall construction,
signal transduction and starch biosynthesis in HSFA2 KO cells in comparison to WT cells imply more
speciﬁc roles for HSFA2 beyond the universal stress response coordination.
The HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight likely have a fundamentally different architecture from the
wild type cell wall, along with diminished processes of cell growth, expansion, and elongation
as identiﬁed by the altered gene expression proﬁles. Many genes encoding proteins important to
these processes are downregulated in the HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight. For instance, the gene
coding glycosyltransferase QUA1 (At3g25140), involved in homogalacturonan biosynthesis and cell
adhesion, the trichome birefringence-like 45 (TBL45 (At2g30010)), which functions in the synthesis
and deposition of secondary wall cellulose, and XTH4 (AT2G06850), which executes the cleavage and
reconnection of cell wall xyloglucan cross-links. It was shown for many plant systems that spaceﬂight
caused changes to the cell wall organization; thus, the ﬁnding of this study suggests that HSFA2 may
have a role in the way a plant cell remodels its wall to adapt to spaceﬂight microgravity [14,16,20].
Given that cells deﬁcient in HsfA2 expression show signs of ER stress and impaired protein sorting
and intracellular protein trafﬁcking, it is possible that the proteins of the cell wall biosynthesis do not
properly mature within ER, and thus fail to be properly sorted or delivered to their destination at the
cell wall periphery [56,57]. However, the heat shock transcription factor of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Hsf1,
was shown to regulate cell wall remodeling in response to heat shock in a more speciﬁc fashion [58].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
15 of 36
The yeast strain mutated in Hsf1 exhibited cell wall integrity defects in the absence of stress and Hsf1
was demonstrated to regulate the expression of a set of proteins that are involved in cell wall formation
and remodeling besides the universal regulation of the HSPs’ expression. The overexpression of a
heat shock protein Hsp150 in S. cerevisiae caused upregulation of many cell wall proteins, leading
to increased cell wall integrity and potentially enhanced the yeasts’ virulence [59]. Also, the Hsf
genes were found among regulatory pathways in secondary cell wall thickening in Medicago truncatula
using microarrays [60]. These examples further support HSFA2’s speciﬁc role in the remodeling of
Arabidopsis cell wall architecture in the spaceﬂight environment.
Figure 6. Graphical presentation of the identiﬁed processes associated with the universal stress
response and speciﬁc roles of HSFA2 in spaceﬂight. The ﬁlled shapes represent the biological process;
the unﬁlled shapes represent the genes; red color indicates upregulation/enhancement; blue color
represents downregulation/decrease. Text in bold highlights the key speciﬁc functions.
Another category of genes that suggested cell wall related roles for HSFA2 in spaceﬂight
adaptation were the secondary metabolite biosynthesis genes associated with wounding (see
Section 2.3.2, Figure S3 in the Supplementary Material). For instance, in spaceﬂight, HSFA2 KO
cells overexpressed genes associated with glucosinolate biosynthesis (NSP5 nitrile speciﬁer protein
5, At5g48180) and AOP1 (2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase, At4g03070), in anthocyanin and
ﬂavinol biosynthesis (SRG1 senescence-related gene 1, At1g17020). These genes, and others in this
category of herbivore response genes, were all overexpressed in spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells relative
to WT spaceﬂight cells (horizontal comparison) [61–63]. The upregulation of these categories of genes
suggests that the cells disabled in HsfA2 responded as they would to an herbivore attack, possibly as a
consequence of diminished expression of cell wall remodeling genes, resulting in a thinning of the cell
wall in spaceﬂight-adapted cells.
The analysis of genes with differentially expressed spaceﬂight vs. ground control (vertical
dimension) of the WT and HSFA2 KO cells further supports the concept that the cell wall remodeling
is part of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight, and that HSFA2 has a central role in this process.
Both cell genotypes engaged the cell wall remodeling genes in their physiological adaptation to
spaceﬂight but with fundamentally different outcomes: the WT cells increased the expression of

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
16 of 36
these genes, while the HSFA2 KO cells reduced its expression of cell wall-related genes in spaceﬂight
relative to their terrestrially grown counterparts (see Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2, Table A1, Figure 6).
The WT cells enhanced the expression of a curculin-like (mannose-binding) lectin family protein
(AT1G78860) that was previously identiﬁed among the secretory cell wall N-glycosylated proteins in a
wall-bound extracellular matrix fraction during citrus pathogen invasion [64] and is described to be
associated with cell wall structural changes and signaling upon biological attack. Also overexpressed
in WT cells was an unknown protein (At4g30500) linked to the cellulose biosynthetic process and
subtilase (AT1G30600), which exhibits serine-type endopeptidase activity that processes the precursor
proteins of the cell wall pectin modiﬁcation enzymes [65]. Contrary to WT cells, the HSFA2 KO cells
mostly downregulated the expression of multiple cell wall remodeling genes previously reported to be
enhanced in spaceﬂight [14]. In spaceﬂight, cells in which HsfA2 was knocked out had diminished
expression of cell wall loosening and cell wall elongation genes such as GASA1 (AT1G75750),
endoxyloglucan transferase XTH4 (AT2G06850), EXPL1 (AT3G45970), and EXO (AT4G08950), relative
to the ground control. These cells also decreased the expression level of genes associated with cell wall
composition such as PMR6 (AT3G54920), which was shown to alter the composition of plant cell wall
in resistance to powdery mildew pathogen, and Glycosyl hydrolase (AT5G13980), a gene shown to
degrade cell wall polysaccharides [66,67].
Cell wall remodeling genes associated with developmental processes and genes related to the
morphogenesis of anatomical structures also showed diminished expression in the HSFA2 KO cells
in spaceﬂight relative to its ground counterparts (see Section 2.2.2, Figure S4 drawing on the Left
in the Supplementary Material). For instance, genes involved in cell elongation due to cell wall
expansion such as GASA1 (At1g75750), EXLA1 (expansin-like A1, At3g45970), and GRH1 (At4g03190),
a GRAS family transcription factor SCR (SCARECROW, At3g54220), which functions in asymmetric
cell division, and auxin efﬂux carrier PIN1 (At1g73590), which is involved in the regulation of cell size,
were all downregulated in the HSFA2 KO cells that had physiologically adapted to spaceﬂight (see
Table A1, Figure S3 in the Supplementary Material) [68,69]. Additionally, 3 genes related to pollen
development: 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase superfamily protein (At3g63290),
ZWI ZWICHEL (At5g65930), and ATACA9, which auto inhibits Ca(2+)-ATPase 9 (At3g21180) [70–72],
all had diminished expression in the HSFA2 KO cells adapted to the spaceﬂight environment.
An essential conclusion drawn from examining the differentially expressed genes in the vertical
dimension was that these genes were not differentially expressed between the two genotypes in
the horizontal comparison of the ground adapted states. Therefore, the way both cell genotypes
modulated the expression of cell wall genes during the physiological adaptation (vertical comparison)
inevitably led to substantial differences in the distinct gene expression proﬁles of the WT and HSFA2
KO spaceﬂight-adapted cells (horizontal comparison) (Section 2.3.2). Summarizing, the HSFA2 KO
cells in spaceﬂight exhibited the diminished cell wall remodeling processes leading presumably to
cell wall thinning compared to the ground HSFA2 KO cells, therefore supporting the potential speciﬁc
HSFA2 roles in the cell wall reorganization in achieving the spaceﬂight-adapted state.
Another speciﬁc role for HSFA2 in spaceﬂight adaptation is associated with the plasma membrane.
Several genes associated with processes on the plasma membrane were differentially expressed in
HSFA2 KO relative to WT cells in spaceﬂight (horizontal comparison) (see Section 2.3.2, Table A2,
Figure S3 in the Supplementary Material). Examples include the overexpression of membrane kinase
receptors such as: Leucine-rich repeat domain protein kinase family proteins, LRKs (At5g65240,
At5g25930), STRUBBELIG-receptor family 5 (At1g78980), and BIR1 BAK1-interacting receptor-like
kinase (At5g48380) [73]. Membrane receptors such as these are essential for myriad processes, including
sensing chemical and physical stimuli from the environment. The abundance of the receptor proteins’
presence at the membrane translates to cell’s sensitivity to the extracellular compounds binding to
these receptors and it is possible that HSFA2 KO cells modulated their responsiveness by increasing
the receptors expression. It is also possible that in the absence of the HSFA2, the signal transduction
from the membrane receptors is altered. The directional link between the expression of the LRR-RLK

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
17 of 36
genes, enhanced expression of HsfA2, and many Hsf and Hsp genes and response to the exogenously
administered arsenic was found in Arabidopsis roots, suggesting that HSFA2 may have a function in
the response to toxic metals in the growth medium [74].
The HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight seemed to also differ from the spaceﬂight WT cells (horizontal
comparison) in starch biosynthesis (see Section 2.3.2). Genes central to starch biosynthesis and
carbohydrate metabolism, such as phosphoglycerate/bisphosphoglyce PGM (At1g78050), isoamylase
1(At2g39930), and NDHN oxidoreductase (AT5G58260), were substantially underexpressed in the
HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight relative to WT. The reports on starch content in plants in microgravity
vary with the experiment and plant species [75–77], but it is possible that HSFA2 plays a role in the
carbohydrate metabolism and energy reserve metabolic processes in microgravity that contributes to
the diverse response of plants to spaceﬂight.
3.2. HSFA2 is Much More Than a Heat Shock Factor—Things Learned from Space
Although HSFA2 is part of the Heat Shock Factor network, the molecular phenotype of the HSFA2
KO in response to spaceﬂight shows that the gene plays an essential role in physiological adaptation
that is well beyond simple thermal metabolism. Aspects of that role are revealed by examination of
the gene expression differences on the ground between HSFA2 KO and WT.
Disabling the expression of HsfA2 caused a change in the expression of 349 genes in the ground
environment. Therefore, cells that did not express HsfA2 lacked not only one gene, but 349, as they
were launched into orbit, and they all potentially contributed to the cells’ metabolic state both in
the control and in the spaceﬂight microgravity environment. This 349-gene difference highlights the
importance of recognizing the cells’ ground adapted state while looking for the differences in the tested
environment which, in this study, is the environment of spaceﬂight. Nearly two-thirds of the genes
differentially expressed between the HSFA2 KO and WT ground cells showed diminished expression
in knockout cells, which could be explained by the transcription factor function of the HSFA2 (see
Figure S2 in the Supplementary Material).
The most prominent class of genes underexpressed in HSFA2 KO cells on the ground as compared
to the WT is associated with protein folding (Table A2; Figure S4 drawing on the Right in the
Supplementary Material). These genes included the chaperone, co-chaperone, and no-chaperone
coding genes that were reported among the critical protein folding genes in Arabidopsis [40].
Such diminished expression of some chaperone genes was in accordance with the microarray dataset
obtained from the A. thaliana HSFA2 KO plants (Array Express accession number E-GEOD-4760) [78].
Additionally, plants overexpressing HsfA2 had elevated expression level of many chaperones in
non-stressed conditions [79]. For instance, transgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing HsfA2 gene
overexpressed many Hsp genes, including 18 genes associated with cell rescue and virulence related
genes in normal conditions [45]. The overexpression of HsfA2 increased the plant’s tolerance to
combined environmental stresses, while plants with knocked out HsfA2 gene had reduced basal and
acquired thermotolerance and oxidative stress tolerance [46]. These observations suggest that HSFA2
regulates the housekeeping expression of the protein folding genes not solely in response to stress.
The severe underexpression of protein folding genes in the HSFA2 KO cells on the ground that
compromised the efﬁciency of the folding machinery was further manifested by the overexpression
of the ER stress genes, notably 3 critical genes of the UPR involved in oxidative protein folding
PDIs/ERO1 (alias ATPDIL1-2 (At1g77510), ATPDIL2-1 UNE5 (At2g47470) and AERO1 (At1g72280)).
It seems that the HsfA2 mutation compromised the basic maintenance of the protein folding processes
that altered the ER homeostasis and that led to ER stress. As the ER stress is a hallmark of the
environmental stress response, it can further explain why the HSFA2 KO cells on the ground showed
enhanced expression of abiotic stress response genes, particularly genes involved in response to
drought, extreme temperature, and high salinity. The genes dehydrin (AT1G54410), a hydrophobic
protein RCI2A (AT3G0588), and DREB2B (AT3G11020) were all upregulated in HSFA2 KO cells in the
control, ground environment [80–82]. In analyzing the differentially expressed ER stress genes, it seems

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
18 of 36
that if a cell experiences ER stress due to an inefﬁciency of the protein folding machinery resulting
from its genetic background, and not the environment, the cells still send a stress-response signal
cascade as they would in response to damaging exogenous or environmental stimuli and activates
the stress response. Therefore, the cells actively engaging in the stress response were sent to the ISS,
which could explain the hypersensitive features of the HSFA2 KO cells in the spaceﬂight-adapted state.
HSFA2 KO underexpressed genes related to oxidative stress tolerance in the ground environment
(see Table A2, Figure S4 drawing on the Right in the Supplementary Material). A strong link between
HSFA2 and the oxidative stress response and tolerance is well established [83–85]. For instance,
the gene At5g61640 coding PMSR1, a ubiquitous enzyme that repairs oxidatively damaged proteins,
was underexpressed in the HSFA2 KO cells on the ground, suggesting compromised tolerance to stress
at minimum oxidative stress.
Fundamental metabolic processes can also be impacted by the environment; carbohydrate
metabolism and cell wall remodeling are good examples of where HSFA2 plays a role these types of
responses. Genes that are involved in the response to sucrose were also expressed at a lower level
in HSFA2 KO cells in the ground-adapted state compared to WT. For instance, the Cold acclimation
protein WCOR413 family (AT4G37220) gene, a canonical, highly sensitive sugar-repressed gene [86]
was downregulated in HSFA2 KO cells on the ground. In accordance, DIN3 DARK INDUCIBLE 3
(AT3G06850) and MCCB 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (AT4G34030), both mitochondrial proteins
involved in valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation during sugar starvation [87,88] were also
down-regulated. Glucose level may inﬂuence protein folding, as high glucose stimulates de novo
protein synthesis, making it possible that diminished gene expression of sugar-responsive genes is
part of the UPR’s strategy to minimize the level of de novo protein translation and to prevent further
overload of the ER folding [89]. This connection further reinforces the link between diminished
carbohydrate metabolic processes and adaptation to the spaceﬂight environment as observed in the
HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight.
Cell wall remodeling is inﬂuenced by a variety of developmental and environmental cues, and it
is well established that there are multiple strategies to achieve an operational goal. The extent to which
HSFA2 contributes to the regulation of these strategies was revealed by comparing the expression
of cell wall related genes in the HSFA2 KO to WT. It has been demonstrated in many studies that
plants in space utilize genes involved in the response to pathogen attack, despite the absence of any
pathogens [20]. This misconceived pathogen response could be a result of reduced gravity loading
causing a distortion on the cell wall, threatening cell wall integrity similar to the physical damage that
the cell wall sustains under pathogen wounding or herbivore attack. Both the WT cells and the HSFA2
KO cells differentially express cell wall-associated genes typical of pathogen attach, but not the same
genes. For instance, while WT cells engaged PEN2 (AT2G44490), which triggers callose deposition in
the cell wall and glucosinolate activation [90], along with two other genes (At3g43250, AT5G38980)
reported to function in wounding and in defense response, the HSFA2 KO cells engaged the Disease
resistance protein CC-NBS-LRR class gene (AT1G59124) [91] and NTA Seven transmembrane MLO
family protein gene (AT2G17430) [92] instead. All of these genes are involved in mounting a defense in
response to pathogen attack, but the gene out of this general class that is utilized depends very much
on whether the genome contains an active HsfA2 gene.
Thus, the differences in the cells’ physiological state on the ground dictate the requirement
for molecular changes in order to adapt to the spaceﬂight environment.
There was only one
gene, At2g03760, coding brassinosteroid sulfotransferase 12 (SOT12), engaged in the same way
in both genotypes during the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight. The enhanced expression
of SOT12 was correlated with actively growing cell cultures and in response to salt, osmotic stress,
hormone treatments, but also in the defense response to a bacterial pathogen attack [93]. However,
the physiological adaptation of the WT cells and HSFA2 KO cells shared 2 other genes, the U12-type
spliceosome (At3g10400), and the Cystatin/monellin protein of unknown function (At4g03570);
yet they showed an opposite change in their relative expression (see Figure 5A, Section 2.4.1). The U12

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
19 of 36
introns, although rare, are indispensable for normal growth and development of plants [94]. The U12
intron splicing is part of the non-sense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), which is important for
destroying transcripts with premature stop codons [95]. Interestingly, the HsfA2 transcript in its
alternative form HsfA2-II is degraded via the NMD pathway [96]. Both genes showed diminished
expression in the HSFA2 KO spaceﬂight cells relative to their ground counterparts, while in the
WT cells, the expression was enhanced in the respective comparison. However, both genes were
overexpressed in the ground in HSFA2 KO cells compared to WT ground cells. As a result of the
expression adjustments that occurred in the spaceﬂight cells, both genotypes achieved the matching
expression level in the spaceﬂight-adapted state. This solitary example of the two genes underlines the
importance of the ground-adapted state gene expression status that mandates requirements for the
gene expression changes during the physiological adaptation to the novel spaceﬂight environment.
3.3. Role of HSFA2 in Spaceﬂight Adaptive Processes
Comparing the gene expression proﬁles among space-adapted genotypes allowed the
identiﬁcation of the genes Required to be expressed at certain levels in order for a plant cell to adapt to
spaceﬂight. There were genes uniquely involved in the physiological adaptation of WT cells but not in
HSFA2 KO cells, as they were already expressed at a spaceﬂight-adapted level in HSFA2 KO on the
ground (see Figure 5C, Section 2.4.1). Thus, the WT cells needed to alter the expression level of these
genes from their terrestrially observed level to express them at a level required for spaceﬂight survival,
while the HSFA2 KO cells arrived at the ISS with these genes already expressed at the required level.
For instance, the PDIL1-2 (AT1G77510) gene involved in the UPR and CUL2 (At1g02980), a ubiquitin E3
ligase of the Skp1-Cullin-F-box (SCF) class, was expressed in HSFA2 KO cells on the ground at the level
required for the spaceﬂight-adapted state (see Table A3) [97]. The cullin protein is a part of a complex
that mediates the ubiquitination and subsequent proteolytic turnover of proteins in a highly speciﬁc
manner [98]. As mentioned above, with a change of the environment, de novo protein synthesis likely
intensiﬁes, increasing the chance for aberrant accumulation of unfolded proteins; thus, some elements
of protein metabolism in the ER are indispensable to ensure proper ER homeostasis when the WT
cells are exposed to a different environment. As already discussed, the HSFA2 KO cells had the
UPR activated in a ground-adapted state due to inefﬁciency in the protein folding and, therefore,
were already equipped with the correcting mechanisms when the environmental change occurred.
Some other required genes were related to cell wall remodeling. For instance, a subtilase-like
protein (At1g30600), with cell-wall glycoside hydrolase activity, that participates in the processing
and/or turnover of cell wall proteins, was upregulated in the WT cells in the physiological adaptation
to spaceﬂight, but this upregulation was not observed in HSFA2 KO cells, and the WT expression
level in the spaceﬂight adaptive state matched that of the HSFA2 KO cells [64]. Cell wall protein
degradation is likely to accompany any changes to the cell wall proteome related to cell wall
remodeling; therefore, the expression of genes involved in proteolysis had to be at a speciﬁc level
in spaceﬂight irrespective of the cell’s genetic background. Another required gene for spaceﬂight
adaptation was the penetration 2 (PEN2) alias beta-glucosidase 26 (At2g44490) gene, which encodes
glycosyl hydrolase. PEN2 was already mentioned as a component of the WT physiological adaptation
and recruited for broad-spectrum antifungal defense responses by callose deposition in the cell wall [99].
The defense response was a biological process shared by WT and HSFA2 KO cells by the genes of
the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight. Identifying the defense response genes among the set of
required genes supports the importance of this process in order for a cell to adapt to spaceﬂight.
Using the HSFA2 KO cells allowed identiﬁcation of genes with expression Corrected to the wild
type levels in order for cells to adapt to spaceﬂight. These genes were uniquely involved in HSFA2 KO
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight and did not have to be engaged in WT cells, as their expression
was affected by the absence of a functional HsfA2 gene in the ground-adapted state. Thus, the WT cells
did not have to make any adjustments to their expression in spaceﬂight; only HSFA2 KO cells had to
bring the expression to a certain level and thus correct the expression level of these genes to achieve

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
20 of 36
the spaceﬂight-adapted state (see Figure 5D, Section 2.4.1). These corrected genes in the knockout
cells deﬁne a new part of the overall landscape of essential genes to achieve a spaceﬂight-adapted
state that would have been overlooked if only WT cells were used. Genes of the defense response,
biotic and mechanical stimuli, and cell wall remodeling were already identiﬁed in plant wild type cells
in spaceﬂight (see Section 3.2) [14,100,101], yet the utilization of HSFA2 KO cells provided additional
insight into the repertoire of genes signiﬁcant to these responses. The MLO7 Seven transmembrane
MLO family protein (At2g17430), FBS1 F-box stress induced 1 (At1g61340), ILL6 IAA-leucine resistant
(ILR)-like gene 6 (At1g44350), and AtPP2-A13 PP2-A13 phloem protein 2-A13 (At3g61060) are a few
examples of individual genes which respond to wounding, mechanical stress, or external stimuli
that had their expression level increased in HSFA2 KO physiological adaptation to match the WT
spaceﬂight levels (see Table A3) [102–104]. Also, strictly cell wall modiﬁcation genes, including PME1
pectin methylesterase 1 (At1g53840), NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold superfamily protein (At2g02400)
that functions in lignin biosynthetic process ENODL17, and early nodulin-like protein 17 (At5g15350)
associated with cell wall pectin metabolic process had their expression levels elevated in spaceﬂight
from the level on the ground, so that it matched the WT levels in spaceﬂight (see Table A3).
Next, genes that encode transport proteins had their expression adjusted in HSFA2 KO cells
to that of WT level, so they became evenly expressed in the spaceﬂight-adapted state. For instance,
the transmembrane transporter genes ATATH9 ABC2 homolog (At2g40090), porin (At1g50400) family
protein, and GAMMA-TIP aquaporin (At2g36830) were no longer differentially expressed in the
spaceﬂight-adapted state between HSFA2 KO and WT cells, as their expression was adjusted in the
physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells (see Table A3). Similarly, nitrate transporter
genes ENTH/ANTH/VHS (At4g40080) superfamily protein, and NRT2.7 (At5g14570) were also
differentially expressed in spaceﬂight to match the WT expression levels of these genes. It is, however,
uncertain how the loss of HSFA2 function was able to affect the transport of various moieties across
the membrane in the ground environment, yet it seems that these transport processes had attained a
particular level of efﬁciency for adaptation to the spaceﬂight environment.
The spaceﬂight environment elicited an accumulation of several branched-chain amino acid
(BCAA) degradation enzymes, the expression levels of which were also corrected from a low level of
expression to a higher level of expression in the HSFA2 KO cells when compared to the expression
level in WT cells in the spaceﬂight environment. The dark inducible 3, DIN3 gene (At3g06850)
coding the subunits of the branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), and two
other genes important to small amino acid degradation, MCCB (At4g34030) coding for subunit β
of methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase participating in BCKDC reactions, and ALDH6B2 (At2g14170)
methylmalonate semi-aldehyde dehydrogenase (see Table A3). A large increase in BCAA accumulation
can be observed due to environmental stress, such as darkness and carbohydrate starvation [88,105].
It is plausible that in the ground environment, the BCAA catabolism was reduced in the HSFA2
KO cells due to the overall problems with the cellular protein homeostasis, while the spaceﬂight
environment elicited an accumulation of BCAAs, similar to that under abiotic stress, thereby raising
the demand for the BCAA degradation enzyme function. Overall, using a knockout line greatly
increases the list of genes that are necessary to adapt to and survive in the spaceﬂight environment
and thereby ampliﬁes the information gained from rare spaceﬂight experimentation opportunities
to learn what sort of biological processes are necessary, what genes are involved in those processes,
and what factors control the expression of those genes.
3.4. Genotypic Adaptation to Spaceﬂight
There were a few genes involved in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight engaged only in
WT cells and not HSFA2 KO cells that resulted in the differential expression in spaceﬂight-adapted
state between the two genotypes (see Figure 5E, Section 2.4.1). It is possible that without HSFA2
function, cells failed to properly regulate these genes’ expression to adapt to spaceﬂight, and therefore,
the expression of these particular genes in the spaceﬂight adaptation is dependent on a functional

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
21 of 36
HsfA2 gene. For instance, the WT cells increased the expression of ATCSLC12 Cellulose-synthase
(At4g07960), suggesting a higher rate of cellulose synthesis and thus cell wall reorganization
processes in spaceﬂight-adapted state (see Table A3) [106]. Cell wall remodeling processes seemed
to differ between the two genotypes, and it is possible that the increase in the cellulose synthesis in
spaceﬂight-adapted cells somehow depends on the function of HSFA2.
An alternative to the idea that genes engaged only in WT cells in spaceﬂight are dependent on a
functional HsfA2 gene is that some of the genes engaged only in WT cells and not HSFA2 KO cells were
only required in WT cells but not in KO cells. In other words, it was not the inability to engage these
genes that excluded them from those expressed in spaceﬂight, but rather simply that there was no
need for them. For instance, a gene coding the membrane receptor SRF5 STRUBBELIG-receptor family
5 (At1g78980) protein was downregulated in the WT physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight, but not
in those of the HSFA2 KO cells which resulted in lower expression level in WT spaceﬂight-adapted
state than in HSFA2 KO cells. The STRUBBELIG (SUB) receptor mediates the signaling pathway of cell
morphogenesis, the orientation of plane of cellular division, and cell proliferation [107]. It is unclear
why the WT cells would diminish the expression of this membrane receptor in spaceﬂight, yet either
a function of HSFA2 is required, or an aspect of HSFA2 KO physiology makes expression of SRF5
superﬂuous in the spaceﬂight environment.
There were a few genes engaged only in HSFA2 KO cells and not WT cells that resulted in
the differential expression in spaceﬂight-adapted state between the two genotypes (see Figure 5F,
Section 2.4.1). It is possible that only cells with a disabled HsfA2 gene were needed to make changes to
these genes’ expression. This reﬂects the HSFA2 KO genotypic adaptation to spaceﬂight environment
and likely represents the genes Compensated for the loss of HSFA2 function in that environment.
Among the compensating genes with enhanced expression was the aforementioned gene of the
UPR: PDI-like 2-3 (At2g32920), supporting the importance of the UPR and likely the ERAD, as well
as HSFA2 KO, cells in achieving the spaceﬂight-adapted state (see Table A3). WT cells did not need
to adjust expression of these particular genes. The ATGSTU25 glutathione S-transferase TAU 25
(At1g171800) gene was another gene with enhanced expression in HSFA2 KO cells in spaceﬂight.
While genes encoding glutathione S-transferase TAU (e.g., ATGSTU1, ATGSTU3, ATGSTU24) were
generally overexpressed in HSFA2 KO cells relative to WT cells in either environment, the HSFA2 KO
cells further elevated the expression of the glutathione S-transferase genes in spaceﬂight to compensate
for the loss of HSFA2 function in this environment. Similarly, vesicle-mediated transporter genes
were among those consistently differentially expressed in HSFA2 KO relative to WT regardless of the
environment, but HSFA2 KO induced additional similar genes during physiological adaptation to
spaceﬂight and showed overexpression of such genes in the spaceﬂight-adapted state. Examples in
this category included the Coatomer, beta’ subunit (At3g15980), Target SNARE coiled-coil domain
protein (At1g29060) and Integral membrane Yip1 family protein (At2g36300) genes related to ER to
Golgi and intra-Golgi vesicular trafﬁc, suggesting that these processes needed to be compensated for
the lack of HSFA2’s function in the spaceﬂight environment.
The HSFA2 KO cells decreased the expression of the two calcium pump Ca(2+)-ATPase
genes, ACA9 (At3g21180), and ACA2 (At4g37640) resulting in their underexpression in the
spaceﬂight-adapted state relative to WT cells (see Table A3). Aside from their involvement in calcium
homeostasis and calcium second messenger functions, these calcium pumps were also shown to
participate in protein processing in the secretory pathway [108]. Interestingly, there was another
gene with the same expression proﬁle coding, the RMR1 transmembrane receptor (At5g66160) of the
intra-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport. The RMR1 functions as a sorting cargo receptor for protein
trafﬁcking [109]. Thus, the HSFA2 KO cell’s strategy for adapting to the spaceﬂight environment
included reducing the protein sorting and trafﬁcking to the destination, possibly to compensate for the
basic inefﬁciency in these processes when the HSFA2 was disabled.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
22 of 36
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. The CEL Experiment of BRIC17
For details on the CEL experiment of BRIC17, please see [28], and Figure 1, which provides
images of the BRIC Hardware and cells used in these analyses. Brieﬂy, the CEL BRIC17 experiment
was launched in the Dragon capsule of SpaceX-3 Commercial Resupply Service (CRS) mission to
the International Space Station (ISS) on the 1st of March 2013. The cultured cell lines (both the
ground control and the spaceﬂight samples) were grown within 60 mm Petri plates in Petri Dish
Fixation Units (PDFUs) that were housed within the Biological Research in Canisters (BRIC) hardware.
The PDFU/BRIC system is a passive, air-tight, non-ventilated, non-illuminated culture system.
The BRIC system is certainly not an optimal habitat for plant growth, and its limitations have been
reviewed [16,110]. However, the BRIC habitat is less inimical to undifferentiated cell cultures than for
photosynthetic seedlings. In addition, both spaceﬂight and ground control cells were each exposed
to the limitations of the BRIC hardware. The spaceﬂight samples were launched to the ISS, while the
ground controls were “launched” on a 48-h delay, and then maintained in the ISS Environmental
Simulator (ISSES) chamber at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The 48-h delay facilitated the downlink
of ISS environmental data for programming the ISSES chamber. The downlinked data included
environmental conditions on the ISS that were duplicated in the ISSES. Cells were ﬁxed within the
BRIC canisters on the ISS with RNAlaterTM (Ambion) on the 10th day in orbit, and the ground controls
were ﬁxed 48 h later. Twenty-four hours after ﬁxation, the entire BRIC was moved to the Minus
Eighty-degree Laboratory Freezer for ISS (MELFI) until the spaceﬂight samples were transported back
to Earth, and the ground control samples were transferred to a standard laboratory −80 ◦C freezer.
The total RNA was extracted from the spaceﬂight samples and the corresponding ground control
samples and subjected to microarrays.
4.2. Tissue Culture Cell Lines
Arabidopsis callus cultures were established de novo, and each cell line was initiated
simultaneously approximately 6 months before launch. Cells derived from hypocotyls were grown
and maintained on plates with solid media containing MS salts (4.33 g/L), 3% sucrose (30 g/L),
MS vitamins (1 mL of 1000× solution), 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) (0.3 mL/L), 0.5% agar
(5 g/L) and kinetin (0.2 mg/L) until dedifferentiated into callus. The callus cells were then transferred
to the standard liquid media containing MS salts (4.33 g/L), 3% sucrose (30 g/L), MS vitamins (1 mL of
1000× solution), and 2,4-D (0.5 mL/L) and maintained in a sterile continuous cell suspension culture.
Two cell lines, each of Col-0 ecotype, were the subjects of this study: wild type (WT), and a knockout
line generated from the HsfA2 T-DNA insertion (SALK_008978C) (HSFA2 KO). The SALK line was
obtained through The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR), (www.arabidopsis.org) [111].
4.3. Preparation of BRIC17 CEL Cell Culture Plates
Liquid suspension cells growing in log phase were transferred to solid media two and a half
days prior to turning over the payload in preparation for launch. The liquid media was decanted,
washed once with fresh liquid media, and then decanted again. A sterile scoop was used to place
about 1 g of cells on the surface of a 60 mm Petri plate (Falcon, Becton Dickinson Labware, Franklin
Lakes, NJ, USA) containing 6.5 mL nutrient agar media (MS salts (4.33 g/L), 3% sucrose (30 g/L),
MS vitamins, 2,4-D 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES) buffer (0.5 g/L), 0.8% agar (8 g/L)).
The cells were then dispersed evenly across the surface. All plate manipulations were conducted under
sterile conditions in a laminar ﬂow hood to assure sterility of both the interior and exterior of plates.
Plates were put into a sterile Nalgene™BioTransport Carrier (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA),
each layer of plates separated with a sterile non-skid plastic insert. The BioTransporter was then sealed
with gas-permeable tape (3M), wrapped in Steri-Wrap™autoclave wraps (Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA)

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
23 of 36
and then driven to KSC. The BRIC17 CEL experiment was turned over to payload engineers in the
SSPF (Space Station Processing Facility) at KSC 48 h before the scheduled launch time.
4.4. RNA Extractions
Total RNA was extracted using Qiashredder and RNAeasy™kits from QIAGEN (QIAGEN
Sciences, Germantown, MD, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Residual DNA
was removed by performing an on-column digestion using an RNase Free DNase (QIAGEN GmbH,
Hilden, Germany). Integrity of the RNA was evaluated using the Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
4.5. Microarrays
cDNA was synthesized using Ovation Pico WTA System (NuGEN Technologies Inc., Redwood
City, CA, USA) and labeled using Encore Biotin Module (NuGEN Technologies Inc.,Redwood City,
CA, USA). Ampliﬁed and labeled cDNA (5 µg/sample) was fragmented and hybridized with rotation
onto Affymetrix GeneChip Arabidopsis ATH1 Genome Arrays for 16 h at 45 ◦C. Arrays were washed
on a Fluidics Station 450 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with the Hybridization Wash and Stain
Kit (Affymetrix) and the Washing Procedure FS450_0004. Scanning was performed using Affymetrix
GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G. For both spaceﬂight and ground control, 5 plates of WT and 3 plates of
HSFA2 KO were analyzed as biological replicates.
4.5.1. Microarray Data Analysis
Affymetrix® Expression Console™Software (Version 1.3) was used to generate.
CEL
ﬁles for each RNA hybridization.
All analysis was performed in R 3.0.0 [112].
Background
adjustment, summarization, and quantile normalization were performed using Limma package [113].
Normalization was made using the Affymetrix MAS 5.0 normalization algorithm [114]. Data quality
was assessed using the arrayQualityMetrics package and various QC charts (Density and Intensity
plot, NUSE, RLE, and RNA Degradation Plot). Probes that had signals absent in all samples were
removed. For each replicate array, each probe-set signal value from spaceﬂight samples was compared
to the probe-set signal value of ground control samples to give gene expression ratios. Differentially
expressed genes were identiﬁed using the Limma package with a Benjamini and Hochberg false
discovery rate multiple testing correction. Genes were considered as differentially expressed with
stringent criteria at P-value < 0.01, abs Fold Change > 2 (−1< FC log2 > +1; labeled as log2 Fold Change)
unless stated otherwise.
4.5.2. Comparison Groups
The groups outlined in the concept of operations and comparisons were established and
abbreviated with a combination of two capital letters and a short version of the cell line name in
superscript (see Figure 2A). Letters: G—Ground Control, F—Spaceﬂight; Superscripts: Wt—WT cells,
Hsf—HSFA2 KO cells.
4.6. Functional Gene Categorization—Gene Ontology Annotations
Gene function was annotated by associations of controlled vocabularies or keywords to data
objects (Gene Ontology, GO). Multiple GO toolkits of this controlled vocabulary system were used to
collect annotations of gene function. Various lists of gene names were created, and enrichment GO
terms were searched after statistical test from pre-calculated backgrounds. All three aspects of gene
products (molecular function, biological process, and subcellular location) described by GO controlled
vocabularies were considered. A signiﬁcance level of 0.05 and ﬁve genes as minimum number of
mapping entries were implemented for the analysis parameters in the following tools:

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
24 of 36
•
AgriGO—An integrated web-based GO analysis toolkit for the agricultural community AgriGO
was used [115]. AgriGO query criteria were as follows: Singular Enrichment Analysis (SEA),
Arabidopsis genemodel (TAIR9) precomputed background, Fisher was selected as the statistical
test method of choice with the NOT-adjust multi-test adjustment method; signiﬁcance level
was set at 0.01 or 0.05, minimum number of mapping of entries was set at 5, plant GO slim was
selected from other Gene ontology types. For Parametric Analysis of Gene Set Enrichment (PAGE),
the selected species was Arabidopsis thaliana, NOT-adjust was selected for multi-test adjustment
method, signiﬁcance level was set at 0.1, minimum number of mapping of entries was set at 10,
and Plant GO slim was selected from other Gene ontology types.
•
AmiGO—If needed, the GO database was accessed through the AmiGO query tool.
•
ATTED-II—The ATTED-II database of coexpressed genes, developed to identify functionally
related genes in Arabidopsis, was also used [116]. The make gene function table function was
implemented to retrieve organized information on gene function (based on TAIR annotation) and
subcellular localization (as predicted by TargetP and WOLF PSORT).
•
gProﬁler—A web-based toolset for functional proﬁling of gene lists was used [117].
Arabidopsis thaliana was the selected organism with most of default options except where the
Benjamini-Hochberg FDR signiﬁcance threshold was selected.
5. Conclusions
Conclusions from these data concern non-thermal roles for the heat shock factors in the
physiological adaptation of plant cells to spaceﬂight. First, the heat shock transcription factor HSFA2,
and likely the whole HSF network, has important roles in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight
through regulation of cell wall and plasma membrane signaling, as well as starch biosynthesis. Second,
disabling HsfA2 leads to activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response and the unfolded
protein stress response and dramatically alters adaptation to spaceﬂight. Without HSFA2, a much larger
change in gene expression is required for spaceﬂight adaptation. Third, the endoplasmic reticulum
and unfolded protein stress responses deﬁne the HSFA2 KO cell physiological state regardless of the
environment, likely because of the deﬁciency in the chaperone-mediated protein folding machinery.
Fourth, the HSFA2 KO cells helped to unravel the HsfA2-dependent genes of the wild type adaptation
to spaceﬂight by identifying a set of genes with a required expression level for a cell to achieve the
spaceﬂight-adapted state, thus suggesting that genetic approaches provide additional insights beyond
those revealed by differential gene expression in WT cells.
Supplementary Materials: Supplementary materials can be found at http://www.mdpi.com/1422-0067/20/2/
390/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.J.F. and A.-L.P.; Data curation, A.K.Z.; Formal analysis, A.K.Z.;
Funding acquisition, R.J.F. and A.-L.P.; Methodology, A.-L.P.; Project administration, R.J.F. and A.-L.P.;
Writing—original draft, A.K.Z.; Writing—review & editing, A.K.Z., C.L., R.J.F. and A.-L.P.
Funding: This was funded by National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Division of Space Life and Physical
Sciences Research and Applications, grants NNX12AK80G and NNX12AN69G to A.-L.P., and R.J.F.
Acknowledgments: We thank the UF Space Lab members (past and present), in particular Eric R. Schultz,
Natasha Sng, and Jordan Callaham for helpful discussion. We thank Lawrence Rassmussen for pre-ﬂight technical
help with the tissue culture cell lines that were used in the BRIC17 CEL experiment. We would also like to thank
the personnel at Kennedy Space Center who supported the BRIC experiment.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to
publish the results.
Data Availability: The microarray data are publicly available from GEO under accession number: GSE95388, link:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE95388. In addition, GeneLab accession number (TBD).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
25 of 36
Appendix A. Gene Expression Tables
Table A1. The selected signiﬁcant GO terms assigned with AgriGO, gProﬁler and ATTED-II to 78 genes
of the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight in WT cells, and 221 genes of the physiological adaptation
to spaceﬂight in HSFA2 KO cells. In some instances, the gene duplicates within ontology were
removed and assigned to the most speciﬁc available GO term class. Cells highlighted in red indicate
upregulation; in green indicate downregulation. Cells marked with “x” indicate no statistically
signiﬁcant differential expression.
ONT
GO Term Name
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
FWt : GWT
FC log2
FHsf : GHsf
FC log2
BP
defense response to other organism GO:0098542
AT2G03760
ST1
sulphotransferase 12
1.1
1.0
AT5G38980
unknown
3.3
X
At3g43250
unknown in wounding
2.6
X
AT4G02460
PMS1
DNA mismatch repair protein, putative
2.2
AT2G44490
PEN2
Glycosyl hydrolase superfamily protein
1.4
X
AT1G59124
Disease resistance protein (CC-NBS-LRR class)
X
2.4
AT2G17430
NTA
Seven transmembrane MLO family protein
X
1.9
AT4G35770
SEN1
Rhodanese/Cell cycle control phosphatase
X
1.8
AT3G61060
PP2-A13
phloem protein 2-A13
X
1.5
AT3G09940
MDHAR
monodehydroascorbate reductase
X
1.4
CC
plant-type cell wall GO:0009505
AT1G30600
Subtilase family protein
2.5
X
At4g30500
unknown in cellulose biosynthetic process
2.4
X
AT2G44490
PEN2
Glycosyl hydrolase superfamily protein
1.4
X
AT1G78860
curculin-like (mannose-binding) lectin
1.3
X
AT5G44130
FLA13
FASCICLIN-like arabinogalactan protein 13 precursor
−2.1
X
AT2G06850
XTH4
xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase 4
X
−2.4
AT5G51550
EXL3
EXORDIUM like 3
X
−2.1
AT5G13980
Glycosyl hydrolase family 38 protein
X
−1.6
AT3G45970
EXPL1
expansin-like A1
X
−1.4
AT1G15390
PDF1A
peptide deformylase 1A
X
−1.4
AT1G75750
GASA1
GAST1 protein homolog 1
X
−1.4
AT4G08950
EXO
EXO Exordium, Phosphate-responsive 1 protein
X
−1.1
AT1G73590
PIN1
Auxin efﬂux carrier family protein
X
−1.0
BP
regulation of biological process GO:0050789
regulation of metabolic process GO:0019222
regulation of cellular metabolic process GO:0031323
AT3G62080
SNF7 family protein
2.6
X
AT5G48560
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) DNA-binding
2.4
X
AT5G01920
STN8
Protein kinase superfamily protein
2.4
X
AT2G46225
ABIL1
ABI-1-like 1
2.2
X
AT5G56270
WRKY2
WRKY DNA-binding protein 2
1.9
X
AT1G27370
SPL10
squamosa promoter binding protein-like 10
1.7
X
AT5G62710
Leucine-rich repeat protein kinase family protein
1.4
X
AT5G05130
DNA/RNA helicase protein
1.1
X
AT5G07580
Integrase-type DNA-binding superfamily protein
−3.3
X
AT4G21380
RK3
receptor kinase 3
−2.9
X
AT2G35530
bZIP16
basic region/leucine zipper transcription factor 16
−2.7
X
AT1G78980
SRF5
STRUBBELIG-receptor family 5
−2.4
X
AT1G78080
WIND1
related to AP2 4
−1.2
X
AT4G36530
alpha/beta-Hydrolases superfamily protein
−1.2
X
CC
endomembrane system GO:0012505
Golgi apparatus GO:0005794
At3g18260
Reticulon family protein
3.1
X
At1g77510
PDIL1-2
PDI-like 1-2 protein disulﬁde isomerase-like 1-2
1.2
X
At2g03760
ST1
sulphotransferase 12
1.1
X
AT5G19070
SNARE associated Golgi protein family
−2.6
X
At2g22900
Galactosyl transferase GMA12/MNN10
−2.4
X
At4g36640
Sec14p-like phosphatidylinositol transferprotein
−1.8
X
At2g32720
CB5-B
cytochrome B5 isoform B
−1.5
X
AT1G19970
ER lumen protein retaining receptor protein
−1.4
X
AT2G43240
Nucleotide-sugar transporter family protein
−1.3
X

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
26 of 36
Table A1. Cont.
ONT
GO Term Name
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
FWt : GWT
FC log2
FHsf : GHsf
FC log2
BP
cellular response to sucrose starvation GO:0043617
AT3G06850
DIN3
2-oxoacid dehydrogenases acyltransferases
X
1.2
AT3G13450
DIN4
branched chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase E1 beta
X
1.3
AT1G21400
E1α
Thiamin diphosphate-binding fold (THDP-binding)
X
1.6
Valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation GO:0009083
AT3G06850
DIN3
2-oxoacid dehydrogenases acyltransferase family protein
X
1.2
AT3G13450
DIN4
branched chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase E1 beta
X
1.3
AT1G21400
E1α
Thiamin diphosphate-binding fold (THDP-binding)
X
1.6
AT2G14170
ALDH6B2
aldehyde dehydrogenase 6B2
X
1.2
At4g34030
MCCB
subunit β of methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCB)
X
1.1
CC
plasma membrane GO:0005886
AT5G67130
PLC-like phosphodiesterases superfamily
X
−2.7
AT3G21180
ATACA9
autoinhibited Ca(2+)-ATPase 9
X
−2.7
AT5G65440
X
−1.9
AT5G15350
ENODL17
early nodulin-like protein 17
X
−1.7
AT5G13980
Glycosyl hydrolase family 38 protein
X
−1.6
AT3G54920
PMR6
Pectin lyase-like superfamily protein
X
−1.5
AT1G17620
Late embryogenesis abundant (LEA)
X
−1.2
AT5G03700
D-mannose binding lectin protein
X
−1.1
AT1G73590
PIN1
Auxin efﬂux carrier family protein
X
−1.0
BP
developmental process GO:0032502
anatomical structure morphogenesis GO:0009653
AT2G35340
MEE29
helicase domain-containing protein
X
−3.2
AT3G63290
2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase
X
−3.1
AT5G65930
ZWI
kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein (ZWICHEL)
X
−3.0
AT4G02460
PMS1
DNA mismatch repair protein, putative
X
−2.9
AT3G47450
RIF1
P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase
X
−2.8
AT3G21180
ATACA9
autoinhibited Ca2+-ATPase 9
X
−2.7
AT2G06850
XTH4
xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase 4
X
−2.4
AT4G15570
MAA3
P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase
X
−1.8
AT3G54220
SCR
SCR Scarecrow alias SGR1 Shoot Gravitropism
X
−1.7
AT3G45970
EXPL1
expansin-like A1
X
−1.4
AT1G75750
GASA1
GAST1 protein homolog 1
X
−1.4
AT4G03190
GRH1
GRR1-like protein 1
X
−1.1
AT1G73590
PIN1
Auxin efﬂux carrier family protein
X
−1.0
Table A2. The selected signiﬁcant GO terms assigned with AgriGO, gProﬁler, and ATTED-II to
349 genes signiﬁcantly differentially expressed in the ground-adapted state between HSFA2 KO
and WT cells, and 220 genes signiﬁcantly differentially expressed in the spaceﬂight-adapted state
between HSFA2 KO and WT cells. In some instances, the gene duplicates within ontology were
removed and assigned to the most speciﬁc available GO term class. Cells highlighted in red indicate
upregulation; in green indicate downregulation. Cells marked with “x” indicate no statistically
signiﬁcant differential expression.
ONT
GO Term Name
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
GHsf : GWt
FC log2
FHsf : FWt
FC log2
BP
response to stimulus GO:0050896
defense response to other organism GO:0098542
AT2G24570
WRKY17
WRKY DNA-binding protein 17
2.1
X
AT2G44490
PEN2
Glycosyl hydrolase superfamily protein
1.7
X
AT1G66760
MATE efﬂux family protein
1.6
X
AT1G72900
Toll-Interleukin-Resistance (TIR) domain-containing
protein
1.2
X
AT1G64790
ILA
ILITYHIA
1.2
X
AT2G43535
Scorpion toxin-like knottin superfamily protein
1.1
X
AT5G07010
ST2A
sulfotransferase 2A
1.1
X
AT1G58360
NAT2
amino acid permease 1
1.0
X
AT1G71140
MATE efﬂux family protein
1.1
1.7
AT1G19020
X
1.1
AT1G50740
Transmembrane proteins 14C
X
1.1

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
27 of 36
Table A2. Cont.
ONT
GO Term Name
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
GHsf : GWt
FC log2
FHsf : FWt
FC log2
BP
AT3G49350
Ypt/Rab-GAP domain of gyp1p superfamily protein
X
2.4
AT3G60420
Phosphoglycerate mutase family protein
X
1.5
AT4G02380
SAG21
senescence-associated gene 21
X
1.2
AT5G25930
Protein kinase family protein with LRR domain
X
1.0
AT5G48380
BIR1
BAK1-interacting receptor-like kinase 1
X
1.2
response to water deprivation GO:0009414 (high salinity)
AT3G05880
RCI2A
Low temperature and salt responsive protein family
1.5
X
AT3G11020
DREB2B
DRE/CRT-binding protein 2B
1.1
X
AT1G54410
dehydrin family protein
1.3
X
response to endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) GO:0034976
response to unfolded protein response (UPR) GO:0006986
response to misfolded protein GO:0051788
response to topologically incorrect protein GO:0035966
At1g72280
AERO1
disulﬁde bond formation protein
2.9
X
AT5G38900
Thioredoxin superfamily protein
2.8
X
AT1G77510
PDIL1-2
PDI-like 1-2 disulﬁde isomerase
2.0
X
AT2G47470
PDIL2-1/UNE5
thioredoxin family protein
1.1
X
AT2G29470
GSTU3
glutathione S-transferase tau 3
1.7
1.8
AT2G29490
GSTU1
glutathione S-transferase TAU 1
1.4
1.5
AT1G17170
GSTU24
glutathione S-transferase TAU 24
1.2
1.4
At2g38470
WRKY33
WRKY-type DNA binding protein
1.2
1.2
At3g49350
—
Ypt/Rab-GAP domain of gyp1p protein
X
2.4
At2g32920
PDIL2-3
PDI-like 2-3 disulﬁde isomerase
X
1.5
At4g02380
SAG21
senescence-associated gene 21
X
1.2
At1g50740
—
Transmembrane proteins 14C
X
1.1
At3g24050
AtGATA-1
GATA transcription factor 1 (AtGATA-1)
X
1.1
At1g19020
—
Expressed protein
X
1.1
endoplasmic reticulum associated degradation (ERAD) GO:0036503
AT1G18260
HRD3A
HCP-like superfamily protein
X
1.2
protein localization GO:0008104
establishment of protein localization GO:0045184
protein transport GO:0015031
vesicle-mediated transport GO:0016192
AT1G29310
SecY protein transport family protein
1.0
1.7
AT3G44340
CEF
clone eighty-four
1.0
1.1
AT1G18830
Transducin/WD40 repeat-like superfamily protein
X
1.2
AT1G29060
Target SNARE coiled-coil domain protein
X
1.5
AT1G50740
Transmembrane proteins 14C
X
1.1
AT1G70490
ATARFA1D
Ras-related small GTP-binding family protein
X
1.7
AT3G15980
Coatomer, beta’ subunit
X
1.1
AT3G49350
Ypt/Rab-GAP domain of gyp1p superfamily protein
X
2.4
AT4G02380
SAG21
senescence-associated gene 21
X
1.2
AT5G25930
Protein kinase family protein with LRR domain
X
1.0
localization GO:0051179
transport GO:0006810
establishment of localization GO:0051234
AT4G24120
YSL1
YELLOW STRIPE like 1
2.5
X
AT2G44490
PEN2
Glycosyl hydrolase superfamily protein
1.7
X
AT5G39040
TAP2
transporter assoc. with antigen processing protein 2
1.6
X
AT1G66760
MATE efﬂux family protein
1.6
X
AT1G30400
MRP1
multidrug resistance-associated protein 1
1.5
X
AT3G53480
PIS1
pleiotropic drug resistance 9
1.5
X
AT2G15880
Leucine-rich repeat (LRR) family protein
1.3
X
AT3G48970
Heavy metal transport/detoxiﬁcation protein
1.3
X
AT3G12520
SULTR4;2
sulfate transporter 4;2
1.2
X
AT1G58360
NAT2
amino acid permease 1
1.0
X
AT2G41700
AtABCA1
ATP-binding cassette A1
1.0
X
AT5G27150
NHX1
Na+/H+ exchanger 1
1.0
X
AT1G71330
NAP5
non-intrinsic ABC protein 5
1.5
1.2
AT1G78570
ROL1
rhamnose biosynthesis 1
1.4
1.1
AT1G71140
MATE efﬂux family protein
1.1
1.7
AT5G54860
Major facilitator superfamily protein
1.1
1.5
AT2G45180
Bifunctional inhibitor/lipid-transfer protein
X
2.9
AT4G27840
SNARE-like superfamily protein
X
2.7
AT5G19070
SNARE associated Golgi protein family
X
2.7
AT2G29940
PDR3
pleiotropic drug resistance 3
X
2.4
AT5G47730
Sec14p-like phosphatidylinositol transfer protein
X
2.0
AT2G43240
Nucleotide-sugar transporter family protein
X
1.6
AT2G36300
Integral membrane Yip1 family protein
X
1.2
AT1G07030
Mitochondrial substrate carrier family protein
X
1.2

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
28 of 36
Table A2. Cont.
ONT
GO Term Name
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
GHsf : GWt
FC log2
FHsf : FWt
FC log2
BP
secondary metabolic process GO:0019748
AT2G29470
GSTU3
glutathione S-transferase tau 3
1.7
1.8
AT1G78570
ROL1
rhamnose biosynthesis 1
1.4
1.1
AT2G29490
GSTU1
glutathione S-transferase TAU 1
1.4
1.5
AT1G17170
GSTU24
glutathione S-transferase TAU 24
1.2
1.4
AT2G38470
WRKY33
WRKY DNA-binding protein 33
1.2
1.2
AT4G03070
AOP1.1
2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase
X
3.7
AT1G17180
GSTU25
glutathione S-transferase TAU 25
X
1.9
AT5G48180
NSP5
nitrile speciﬁer protein 5
X
1.4
AT1G17020
SRG1
senescence-related gene 1
X
1.1
CC
plasma membrane GO:0005886 (plasma membrane receptor kinases)
AT1G78980
SRF5
STRUBBELIG-receptor family 5
X
2.2
AT5G65240
Leucine-rich repeat protein kinase family protein
X
1.9
AT5G48380
BIR1
BAK1-interacting receptor-like kinase 1
X
1.2
AT5G25930
Protein kinase family protein with LRR domain
X
1.0
BP
response to stimulus GO:0050896
response to stress GO:0006950
protein folding (chaperones)
AT2G26150
HSFA2
heat shock transcription factor A2
−7.3
−6.8
At3g08910
DNAJ heat shock family protein
−3.2
X
At4g26780
MGE2
MGE2 Co-chaperone GrpE family protein
−2.5
X
At1g80030
DnaJ protein
−1.4
X
At5g37670
low-molecular-weight heat shock protein
−1.2
X
At4g28480
DNAJ heat shock family protein
−1.1
X
protein folding (non-chaperones)
At1g44414
unknown
−1.5
X
At1g03070
Bax inhibitor-1 family protein
−1.3
X
At3g15180
ARM repeat superfamily protein
−1.3
X
At5g48580
FKBP15-2
peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase-like protein
−1.1
X
At4g23493
unknown
−1.1
X
response to oxidative stress GO:0006979
response to reactive oxygen species GO:0000302
response to hydrogen peroxide GO:0042542
AT5G19875
−3.0
X
AT1G76080
CDSP32
chloroplastic drought-induced stress protein 32 kD
−2.3
X
AT4G08920
OOP2
cryptochrome 1
−2.0
X
AT3G16500
PAP1
phytochrome-associated protein 1
−1.9
X
AT4G34020
DJ1C
Class I glutamine amidotransferase-like protein
−1.7
X
AT4G35770
SEN1
Rhodanese/Cell cycle control phosphatase
−1.6
X
AT2G47180
GolS1
galactinol synthase 1
−1.5
X
AT3G20340
−1.4
X
AT4G37530
Peroxidase superfamily protein
−1.3
X
AT4G27670
HSP21
heat shock protein 21
−1.3
X
AT3G25530
GR1
glyoxylate reductase 1
−1.2
X
AT5G61640
PMSR1
peptidemethionine sulfoxide reductase 1
−1.2
X
AT2G14170
ALDH6B2
aldehyde dehydrogenase 6B2
−1.1
X
AT3G53260
PAL2
phenylalanine ammonia-lyase 2
−1.1
X
AT1G52760
LysoPL2
lysophospholipase 2
−1.0
X
response to sucrose stimulus GO:0009744
AT2G17880
Chaperone DnaJ-domain superfamily protein
−3.0
X
At3g61060
PP2-A13
phloem protein 2-A13
−2.1
X
AT4G37220
Cold acclimation protein WCOR413 family
−1.9
X
At3g24190
Protein kinase superfamily protein
−1.7
X
AT3G06850
DIN3/LTA1
2-oxoacid dehydrogenases acyltransferase
−1.2
X
cellular amino acid and derivative metabolic process GO:0006519
At5g65010
ASN2
asparagine synthetase 2
−2.9
X
At2g02400
NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold superfamily protein
−1.6
X
At3g07630
AtADT2
arogenate dehydratase 2
−1.4
X
At5g24530
DMR6
2-oxoglutarate (2OG) and Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase
−1.4
X
At1g73500
MKK9
MAP kinase kinase 9
−1.2
X
At4g34030
MCCB
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase
−1.1
X
At5g48220
Aldolase-type TIM barrel family protein
−1.1
X

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
29 of 36
Table A2. Cont.
ONT
GO Term Name
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
GHsf : GWt
FC log2
FHsf : FWt
FC log2
CC
cell wall GO:0005618
external encapsulating structure GO:0030312
AT1G15020
QSOX1
quiescin-sulfhydryl oxidase 1
X
−3.1
AT1G76020
Thioredoxin superfamily protein
X
−2.8
At2g30010
TBL45
trichome birefringence-like 45
X
−2.4
AT3G25140
QUA1/GAUT8
galacturanosyl transferase 8
X
−2.0
AT2G06850
XTH4
xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase 4
X
−2.0
At4g07960
CSLC12
CSL12 Cellulose-synthase-like C12
X
−2.0
At5g50030
Plant invertase/pectin methylesterase inhibitor protein
X
−1.9
At1g16530
ASL9
assymetric leaves 2 like 9
X
−1.7
AT1G75830
PDF1.1
low-molecular-weight cysteine-rich 67
X
−1.1
AT2G02100
PDF2.2
low-molecular-weight cysteine-rich 69
X
−1.1
AT5G64260
EXL2
EXORDIUM like 2
X
−1.1
plastid GO:0009536
AT3G19120
PIF / Ping-Pong family of plant transposases
X
−3.4
AT5G04810
pentatricopeptide (PPR) repeat-containing protein
X
−3.0
AT5G16810
Protein kinase superfamily protein
X
−2.6
AT5G47870
RAD52-2B
X
−2.4
AT1G54350
ABCD2
ABC transporter family protein
X
−2.2
AT1G32440
PKp3
plastidial pyruvate kinase 3
X
−2.2
AT1G14410
WHY1
ssDNA-binding transcriptional regulator
X
−1.8
AT3G52150
RNA-binding (RRM/RBD/RNP motifs) family protein
X
−1.6
AT3G20930
RNA-binding (RRM/RBD/RNP motifs) family protein
X
−1.5
AT2G20690
lumazine-binding family protein
X
−1.0
AT2G45990
X
−1.0
energy reserve metabolic process GO:0006112 (starch biosynthetic process GO:0019252)
AT3G47450
RIF1
P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase
X
−2.6
AT5G58260
NdhN
oxidoreductase
X
−2.4
At1g78050
PGM
phosphoglycerate/bisphosphoglyce
X
−2.2
AT2G39930
ISA1
isoamylase 1
X
−1.7
AT4G39550
Galactose oxidase/kelch repeat superfamily protein
X
−1.3
Table A3. The selected individual genes with a corresponding functional annotation from the Required,
Corrected, HsfA2-dependent; WT genotypic adaptation, or Compensated; HSFA2 KO genotypic
adaptation presented on Figure 5C–F. Cells highlighted in red indicate upregulation; in green indicate
downregulation. Cells marked with “x” indicate no statistically signiﬁcant differential expression.
Category
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
Functional Annotation
FWt : GWT
FC log2
FHsf : GHsf
FC log2
GHsf : GWt
FC log2
FHsf : FHsf
FC log2
Required
At1g02980
CUL2
cullin 2
proteolytic turnover
2.5
X
3.0
X
At3g18260
—
Reticulon family protein
ER
3.1
X
3.7
X
At1g77510
ATPDIL1-2
PDI-like 1-2
ER stress, UPR
1.2
X
2.0
X
At1g30600
Subtilase family protein
cell wall
2.5
X
2.7
X
At2g44490
PEN2
Penetration 2, BGLU26
Beta Glucosidase 26
defense response, response
to wounding
1.4
X
1.7
X
Corrected
At5g40470
RNI-like superfamily
protein
response to wounding,
mechanical stress
X
2.1
−2.1
X
At1g44350
ILL6
ILL6 IAA-leucine
resistant (ILR)-like
gene 6
response to wounding,
mechanical stress
X
1.9
−2.0
X
At2g17430
MLO7
Seven transmembrane
MLO family protein
response to wounding,
mechanical stress
X
1.9
−1.7
X
At3g61060
AtPP2-A13
PP2-A13 phloem
protein 2-A13
response to wounding,
mechanical stress
X
1.5
−2.1
X
At4g38550
phospholipase-like
protein (PEARLI 4)
family
response to wounding,
mechanical stress
X
1.4
−1.3
X
At1g61340
FBS1 F-box stress
induced 1
response to wounding,
mechanical stress
X
1.0
−1.8
X
At2g02400
NAD(P)-binding
Rossmann-fold
superfamily protein
cell wall
X
2.0
−1.6
X
At1g53840
ATPME1
PME1 pectin
methylesterase 1
cell wall
X
1.1
−1.4
X
At5g15350
ENODL17
early nodulin-like
protein 17
cell wall
X
−1.7
1.0
X

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
30 of 36
Table A3. Cont.
Category
Transcript ID
Gene Symbol
Gene Description
Functional Annotation
FWt : GWT
FC log2
FHsf : GHsf
FC log2
GHsf : GWt
FC log2
FHsf : FHsf
FC log2
Corrected
At2g36830
GAMMA-TIP
GAMMA-TIP gamma
tonoplast intrinsic
protein
transmembrane transporter
genes
X
3.1
−3.5
X
At1g50400
porin family protein
transmembrane transporter
genes
X
2.2
−2.0
X
At2g40090
ATATH9
ABC2 homolog 9
transmembrane transporter
genes
X
1.1
−1.0
X
At5g14570
ATNRT2.7
NRT2.7 high afﬁnity
nitrate transporter
nitrate transporters genes
X
2.4
−2.6
X
At4g40080
ENTH/ANTH/VHS
superfamily protein
nitrate transporters genes
X
2.1
−2.3
X
At3g06850
DIN3
DIN3 dark inducible 3,
BCE2
valine, leucine and
isoleucine degradation
X
1.2
−1.2
X
At2g14170
ALDH6B2
ALDH6B2 aldehyde
dehydrogenase 6B2
valine, leucine and
isoleucine degradation
X
1.2
−1.1
X
At4g34030
MCCB
MCCB
3-methylcrotonyl-CoA
carboxylase
valine, leucine and
isoleucine degradation
X
1.1
−1.1
X
HsfA2-
Dependent
WT
genotypic
adaptation
At4g07960
ATCSLC12
Cellulose-synthase-like
C12
cell wall
1.9
X
X
−2.0
At1g78980
SRF5
SRF5
STRUBBELIG-receptor
family 5
plasma membrane receptor
kinase
−2.4
X
X
2.2
At5g19070
—
SNARE associated
Golgi protein family
vesicle-mediated transport
−2.6
X
X
2.7
At2g43240
—
Nucleotide-sugar
transporter family
protein
transport
−1.3
X
X
1.6
Compensated
HSFA2 KO
genotypic
adaptation
At2g32920
ATPDIL2-3
PDI-like 2-3
ER stress, UPR
X
1.0
X
1.5
At1g17180
ATGSTU25
glutathione
S-transferase TAU 25
UPR
X
1.7
X
1.9
At3g15980
—
Coatomer, beta’ subunit
vesicle-mediated transport
X
1.7
X
1.7
At1g29060
—
Target SNARE
coiled-coil domain
protein
vesicle-mediated transport
X
1.3
X
1.5
At2g36300
—
Integral membrane Yip1
family protein
vesicle-mediated transport
X
1.0
X
1.2
At3g12180
—
Cornichon family
protein
intra-Golgi
vesicle-mediated transport
X
−2.7
X
−2.0
At5g66160
RMR1
receptor homology,
transmembrane domain
ring H2
intra-Golgi
vesicle-mediated transport
X
−1.6
X
−1.7
At3g21180
ACA9
autoinhibited
Ca(2+)-ATPase 9
calcium pump
X
−2.7
X
−2.6
At4g37640
ACA2
calcium ATPase 2
calcium pump
X
−2.2
X
−1.7
References
1.
Fortunati, A.; Piconese, S.; Tassone, P.; Ferrari, S.; Migliaccio, F. Rha1, a new mutant of Arabidopsis disturbed
in root slanting, gravitropism and auxin physiology. Plant Signal. Behav. 2008, 3, 989–990. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2.
Gallegos, G.L.; Hilaire, E.M.; Peterson, B.V.; Brown, C.S.; Guikema, J.A. Effects of microgravity and
clinorotation on stress ethylene production in two starchless mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana. J. Gravit.
Physiol. 1995, 2, P153–P154. [PubMed]
3.
Kriegs, B.; Theisen, R.; Schnabl, H. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and Ran expression during simulated and
real microgravity. Protoplasma 2006, 229, 163–174. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Zupanska, A.K.; Denison, F.C.; Ferl, R.J.; Paul, A.-L. Spaceﬂight engages heat shock protein and other
molecular chaperone genes in tissue culture cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. Am. J. Bot. 2013, 100, 235–248.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Martzivanou, M.; Babbick, M.; Cogoli-Greuter, M.; Hampp, R. Microgravity-related changes in gene
expression after short-term exposure of Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures. Protoplasma 2006, 229, 155–162.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Centis-Aubay, S.; Gasset, G.; Mazars, C.; Ranjeva, R.; Graziana, A. Changes in gravitational forces induce
modiﬁcations of gene expression in A. thaliana seedlings. Planta 2003, 218, 179–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Babbick, M.; Dijkstra, C.; Larkin, O.J.; Anthony, P.; Davey, M.R.; Power, J.B.; Lowe, K.C.; Cogoli-Greuter, M.;
Hampp, R. Expression of transcription factors after short-term exposure of Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures
to hypergravity and simulated microgravity (2-D/3-D clinorotation, magnetic levitation). Adv. Space Res.
2007, 39, 1182–1189. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
31 of 36
8.
Kimbrough, J.M.; Salinas-Mondragon, R.; Boss, W.F.; Brown, C.S.; Sederoff, H.W. The fast and transient
transcriptional network of gravity and mechanical stimulation in the Arabidopsis root apex. Plant Physiol.
2004, 136, 2790–2805. [CrossRef]
9.
Soh, H.; Auh, C.; Soh, W.Y.; Han, K.; Kim, D.; Lee, S.; Rhee, Y. Gene expression changes in Arabidopsis
seedlings during short- to long-term exposure to 3-D clinorotation. Planta 2011, 234, 255–270. [CrossRef]
10.
Soh, H.; Choi, Y.; Lee, T.-K.; Yeo, U.-D.; Han, K.; Auh, C.; Lee, S. Identiﬁcation of unique cis-element pattern
on simulated microgravity treated Arabidopsis by in silico and gene expression. Adv. Space Res. 2012, 50,
397–407. [CrossRef]
11.
Kittang, A.I.; van Loon, J.J.; Vorst, O.; Hall, R.D.; Fossum, K.; Iversen, T.H. Ground based studies of gene
expression in Arabidopsis exposed to gravity stresses. J. Gravit. Physiol. 2004, 11, P223–P224. [PubMed]
12.
Chen, B.; Wang, Y. Proteomic and physiological studies provide insight into photosynthetic response of rice
(Oryza sativa L.) seedlings to microgravity. Photochem. Photobiol. 2016, 92, 561–570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Correll, M.J.; Pyle, T.P.; Millar, K.D.; Sun, Y.; Yao, J.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z. Transcriptome analyses of
Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings grown in space: Implications for gravity-responsive genes. Planta 2013, 238,
519–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Ferl, R.J.; Koh, J.; Denison, F.; Paul, A.-L. Spaceﬂight induces speciﬁc alterations in the proteomes of
Arabidopsis. Astrobiology 2015, 15, 32–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Johnson, C.M.; Subramanian, A.; Pattathil, S.; Correll, M.J.; Kiss, J.Z. Comparative transcriptomics indicate
changes in cell wall organization and stress response in seedlings during spaceﬂight. Am. J. Bot. 2017.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Kwon, T.; Sparks, J.A.; Nakashima, J.; Allen, S.N.; Tang, Y.; Blancaﬂor, E.B. Transcriptional response of
Arabidopsis seedlings during spaceﬂight reveals peroxidase and cell wall remodeling genes associated with
root hair development. Am. J. Bot. 2015, 102, 21–35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Mazars, C.;
Briere, C.;
Grat, S.;
Pichereaux, C.;
Rossignol, M.;
Pereda-Loth, V.;
Eche, B.;
Boucheron-Dubuisson, E.; Le Disquet, I.; Medina, F.J.; et al. Microsome-associated proteome modiﬁcations
of Arabidopsis seedlings grown on board the International Space Station reveal the possible effect on plants
of space stresses other than microgravity. Plant Signal. Behav. 2014, 9, e29637. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Paul, A.-L.; Popp, M.P.; Gurley, W.B.; Guy, C.L.; Norwood, K.L.; Ferl, R.J. Arabidopsis gene expression patterns
are altered during spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Res. 2005, 36, 1175–1181. [CrossRef]
19.
Paul, A.-L.; Zupanska, A.K.; Ostrow, D.T.; Zhang, Y.; Sun, Y.; Li, J.L.; Shanker, S.; Farmerie, W.G.;
Amalﬁtano, C.E.; Ferl, R.J. Spaceﬂight transcriptomes: Unique responses to a novel environment. Astrobiology
2012, 12, 40–56. [CrossRef]
20.
Paul, A.-L.; Zupanska, A.K.; Schultz, E.R.; Ferl, R.J. Organ-speciﬁc remodeling of the Arabidopsis
transcriptome in response to spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol. 2013, 13, 112. [CrossRef]
21.
Shi, K.; Gu, J.; Guo, H.; Zhao, L.; Xie, Y.; Xiong, H.; Li, J.; Zhao, S.; Song, X.; Liu, L. Transcriptome
and proteomic analyses reveal multiple differences associated with chloroplast development in the
spaceﬂight-induced wheat albino mutant mta. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0177992. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Sugimoto, M.; Oono, Y.; Gusev, O.; Matsumoto, T.; Yazawa, T.; Levinskikh, M.A.; Sychev, V.N.; Bingham, G.E.;
Wheeler, R.; Hummerick, M. Genome-wide expression analysis of reactive oxygen species gene network in
Mizuna plants grown in long-term spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol. 2014, 14, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Vandenbrink, J.P.; Kiss, J.Z. Space, the ﬁnal frontier: A critical review of recent experiments performed in
microgravity. Plant Sci. 2016, 243, 115–119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Paul, A.-L.; Sng, N.J.; Zupanska, A.K.; Krishnamurthy, A.; Schultz, E.R.; Ferl, R.J. Genetic dissection of the
Arabidopsis spaceﬂight transcriptome: Are some responses dispensable for the physiological adaptation of
plants to spaceﬂight? PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0180186. [CrossRef]
25.
Fengler, S.; Spirer, I.; Neef, M.; Ecke, M.; Nieselt, K.; Hampp, R. A whole-genome microarray study of
Arabidopsis thaliana semisolid callus cultures exposed to microgravity and nonmicrogravity related spaceﬂight
conditions for 5 days on board of Shenzhou 8. BioMed Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 547495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Salmi, M.L.; Roux, S.J. Gene expression changes induced by space ﬂight in single-cells of the fern Ceratopteris
richardii. Planta 2008, 229, 151–159. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Zhang, Y.; Wang, L.; Xie, J.; Zheng, H. Differential protein expression proﬁling of Arabidopsis thaliana callus
under microgravity on board the Chinese SZ-8 spacecraft. Planta 2015, 241, 475–488. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
32 of 36
28.
Zupanska, A.K.; Schultz, E.R.; Yao, J.; Sng, N.J.; Zhou, M.; Callaham, J.B.; Ferl, R.J.; Paul, A.-L. ARG1
Functions in the Physiological Adaptation of Undifferentiated Plant Cells to Spaceﬂight. Astrobiology 2017,
17, 1077–1111. [CrossRef]
29.
Scharf, K.D.; Berberich, T.; Ebersberger, I.; Nover, L. The plant heat stress transcription factor (Hsf) family:
Structure, function and evolution. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2012, 1819, 104–119. [CrossRef]
30.
Guo, M.; Liu, J.H.; Ma, X.; Luo, D.X.; Gong, Z.H.; Lu, M.H. The Plant Heat Stress Transcription Factors
(HSFs): Structure, Regulation, and Function in Response to Abiotic Stresses. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 114.
[CrossRef]
31.
Nover, L.; Bharti, K.; Doring, P.; Mishra, S.K.; Ganguli, A.; Scharf, K.D. Arabidopsis and the heat stress
transcription factor world: How many heat stress transcription factors do we need? Cell Stress Chaperones
2001, 6, 177–189. [CrossRef]
32.
Schofﬂ, F.; Prandl, R.; Reindl, A. Regulation of the heat-shock response. Plant Physiol. 1998, 117, 1135–1141.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Rajan, V.B.; D’Silva, P. Arabidopsis thaliana J-class heat shock proteins: Cellular stress sensors. Funct. Integr.
Genomics 2009, 9, 433–446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Young, J.C. Mechanisms of the Hsp70 chaperone system. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2010, 88, 291–300. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35.
Mayer, M.P.; Bukau, B. Hsp70 chaperones: Cellular functions and molecular mechanism. Cell. Mol. Life Sci.
2005, 62, 670–684. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Tu, B.P.; Weissman, J.S. Oxidative protein folding in eukaryotes: Mechanisms and consequences. J. Cell Biol.
2004, 164, 341–346. [CrossRef]
37.
Riemer, J.; Bulleid, N.; Herrmann, J.M. Disulﬁde formation in the ER and mitochondria: Two solutions to a
common process. Science 2009, 324, 1284–1287. [CrossRef]
38.
Trombetta, E.S.; Parodi, A.J. Quality control and protein folding in the secretory pathway. Annu. Rev. Cell
Dev. Biol. 2003, 19, 649–676. [CrossRef]
39.
Howell, S.H. Endoplasmic reticulum stress responses in plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2013, 64, 477–499.
[CrossRef]
40.
Martinez, I.M.; Chrispeels, M.J. Genomic analysis of the unfolded protein response in Arabidopsis shows its
connection to important cellular processes. Plant Cell 2003, 15, 561–576. [CrossRef]
41.
Su, W.; Liu, Y.; Xia, Y.; Hong, Z.; Li, J. The Arabidopsis homolog of the mammalian OS-9 protein plays a key
role in the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of misfolded receptor-like kinases. Mol. Plant
2012, 5, 929–940. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Huttner, S.; Veit, C.; Schoberer, J.; Grass, J.; Strasser, R. Unraveling the function of Arabidopsis thaliana OS9
in the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of glycoproteins. Plant Mol. Biol. 2012, 79, 21–33.
[CrossRef]
43.
Ceriotti, A. Waste disposal in the endoplasmic reticulum, ROS production and plant salt stress response.
Cell Res. 2011, 21, 555–557. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Liu, J.X.; Howell, S.H. Endoplasmic reticulum protein quality control and its relationship to environmental
stress responses in plants. Plant Cell 2010, 22, 2930–2942. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Nishizawa, A.; Yabuta, Y.; Yoshida, E.; Maruta, T.; Yoshimura, K.; Shigeoka, S. Arabidopsis heat shock
transcription factor A2 as a key regulator in response to several types of environmental stress. Plant J. 2006,
48, 535–547. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Li, C.; Chen, Q.; Gao, X.; Qi, B.; Chen, N.; Xu, S.; Chen, J.; Wang, X. AtHsfA2 modulates expression of stress
responsive genes and enhances tolerance to heat and oxidative stress in Arabidopsis. Sci. China C Life Sci.
2005, 48, 540–550. [CrossRef]
47.
Baniwal, S.K.; Bharti, K.; Chan, K.Y.; Fauth, M.; Ganguli, A.; Kotak, S.; Mishra, S.K.; Nover, L.; Port, M.;
Scharf, K.D.; et al. Heat stress response in plants: A complex game with chaperones and more than twenty
heat stress transcription factors. J. Biosci. 2004, 29, 471–487. [CrossRef]
48.
Sugio, A.; Dreos, R.; Aparicio, F.; Maule, A.J. The cytosolic protein response as a subcomponent of the wider
heat shock response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2009, 21, 642–654. [CrossRef]
49.
Cubano, L.A.; Lewis, M.L. Effect of vibrational stress and spaceﬂight on regulation of heat shock proteins
hsp70 and hsp27 in human lymphocytes (Jurkat). J. Leukoc. Biol. 2001, 69, 755–761.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
33 of 36
50.
Nishizawa-Yokoi, A.; Yoshida, E.; Yabuta, Y.; Shigeoka, S. Analysis of the regulation of target genes by an
Arabidopsis heat shock transcription factor, HsfA2. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2009, 73, 890–895. [CrossRef]
51.
Hahn, J.S.; Hu, Z.; Thiele, D.J.; Iyer, V.R. Genome-wide analysis of the biology of stress responses through
heat shock transcription factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2004, 24, 5249–5256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52.
Pirkkala, L.; Nykanen, P.; Sistonen, L. Roles of the heat shock transcription factors in regulation of the heat
shock response and beyond. FASEB J. 2001, 15, 1118–1131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Ogawa, D.; Yamaguchi, K.; Nishiuchi, T. High-level overexpression of the Arabidopsis HsfA2 gene confers not
only increased themotolerance but also salt/osmotic stress tolerance and enhanced callus growth. J. Exp. Bot.
2007, 58, 3373–3383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Parsons, H.T.; Christiansen, K.; Knierim, B.; Carroll, A.; Ito, J.; Batth, T.S.; Smith-Moritz, A.M.; Morrison, S.;
McInerney, P.; Hadi, M.Z.; et al. Isolation and proteomic characterization of the Arabidopsis Golgi deﬁnes
functional and novel components involved in plant cell wall biosynthesis. Plant Physiol. 2012, 159, 12–26.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Gebbie, L.K.; Burn, J.E.; Hocart, C.H.; Williamson, R.E. Genes encoding ADP-ribosylation factors in
Arabidopsis thaliana L. Heyn.; genome analysis and antisense suppression. J. Exp. Bot. 2005, 56, 1079–1091.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Oikawa, A.; Lund, C.H.; Sakuragi, Y.; Scheller, H.V. Golgi-localized enzyme complexes for plant cell wall
biosynthesis. Trends Plant Sci. 2013, 18, 49–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Inada, N.; Ueda, T. Membrane trafﬁcking pathways and their roles in plant-microbe interactions. Plant Cell
Physiol. 2014, 55, 672–686. [CrossRef]
58.
Imazu, H.; Sakurai, H. Saccharomyces cerevisiae heat shock transcription factor regulates cell wall remodeling
in response to heat shock. Eukaryot. Cell 2005, 4, 1050–1056. [CrossRef]
59.
Hsu, P.H.; Chiang, P.C.; Liu, C.H.; Chang, Y.W. Characterization of cell wall proteins in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae clinical isolates elucidates Hsp150p in virulence. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0135174. [CrossRef]
60.
Wang, H.; Yang, J.H.; Chen, F.; Torres-Jerez, I.; Tang, Y.; Wang, M.; Du, Q.; Cheng, X.; Wen, J.; Dixon, R.
Transcriptome analysis of secondary cell wall development in Medicago truncatula. BMC Genom. 2016, 17, 23.
[CrossRef]
61.
Hopkins, R.J.; van Dam, N.M.; van Loon, J.J. Role of glucosinolates in insect-plant relationships and
multitrophic interactions. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 2009, 54, 57–83. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Burow, M.; Losansky, A.; Muller, R.; Plock, A.; Kliebenstein, D.J.; Wittstock, U. The genetic basis of
constitutive and herbivore-induced ESP-independent nitrile formation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 2009,
149, 561–574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Mao, G.; Meng, X.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, Z.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, S. Phosphorylation of a WRKY transcription factor
by two pathogen-responsive MAPKs drives phytoalexin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2011, 23,
1639–1653. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Minic, Z.; Jamet, E.; Negroni, L.; Arsene der Garabedian, P.; Zivy, M.; Jouanin, L. A sub-proteome of
Arabidopsis thaliana mature stems trapped on Concanavalin A is enriched in cell wall glycoside hydrolases.
J. Exp. Bot. 2007, 58, 2503–2512. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Senechal, F.; Graff, L.; Surcouf, O.; Marcelo, P.; Rayon, C.; Bouton, S.; Mareck, A.; Mouille, G.; Stintzi, A.;
Hofte, H.; et al. Arabidopsis PECTIN METHYLESTERASE17 is co-expressed with and processed by SBT3.5,
a subtilisin-like serine protease. Ann. Bot. 2014, 114, 1161–1175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Vogel, J.P.; Raab, T.K.; Schiff, C.; Somerville, S.C. PMR6, a pectate lyase-like gene required for powdery
mildew susceptibility in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 2002, 14, 2095–2106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Minic, Z.; Jouanin, L. Plant glycoside hydrolases involved in cell wall polysaccharide degradation.
Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2006, 44, 435–449. [CrossRef]
68.
Lee, Y.; Choi, D.; Kende, H. Expansins: Ever-expanding numbers and functions. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2001,
4, 527–532. [CrossRef]
69.
Di Laurenzio, L.; Wysocka-Diller, J.; Malamy, J.E.; Pysh, L.; Helariutta, Y.; Freshour, G.; Hahn, M.G.;
Feldmann, K.A.; Benfey, P.N. The SCARECROW gene regulates an asymmetric cell division that is essential
for generating the radial organization of the Arabidopsis root. Cell 1996, 86, 423–433. [CrossRef]
70.
Boavida, L.C.; Shuai, B.; Yu, H.J.; Pagnussat, G.C.; Sundaresan, V.; McCormick, S. A collection of Ds
insertional mutants associated with defects in male gametophyte development and function in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Genetics 2009, 181, 1369–1385. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
34 of 36
71.
Krishnakumar, S.; Oppenheimer, D.G. Extragenic suppressors of the arabidopsis zwi-3 mutation identify new
genes that function in trichome branch formation and pollen tube growth. Development 1999, 126, 3079–3088.
[PubMed]
72.
Schiott, M.; Romanowsky, S.M.; Baekgaard, L.; Jakobsen, M.K.; Palmgren, M.G.; Harper, J.F. A plant plasma
membrane Ca2+ pump is required for normal pollen tube growth and fertilization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2004, 101, 9502–9507. [CrossRef]
73.
Lalonde, S.; Sero, A.; Pratelli, R.; Pilot, G.; Chen, J.; Sardi, M.I.; Parsa, S.A.; Kim, D.Y.; Acharya, B.R.;
Stein, E.V.; et al. A membrane protein/signaling protein interaction network for Arabidopsis version AMPv2.
Front. Physiol. 2010, 1, 24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Fu, S.F.; Chen, P.Y.; Nguyen, Q.T.; Huang, L.Y.; Zeng, G.R.; Huang, T.L.; Lin, C.Y.; Huang, H.J. Transcriptome
proﬁling of genes and pathways associated with arsenic toxicity and tolerance in Arabidopsis. BMC Plant Biol.
2014, 14, 94. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Mortley, D.G.; Bonsi, C.K.; Hill, W.A.; Morris, C.E.; Williams, C.S.; Davis, C.F.; Williams, J.W.; Levine, L.H.;
Petersen, B.V.; Wheeler, R.M. Inﬂuence of microgravity environment on root growth, soluble sugars,
and starch concentration of sweetpotato stem cuttings. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 2008, 133, 327–332. [PubMed]
76.
Stutte, G.W.; Monje, O.; Hatﬁeld, R.D.; Paul, A.L.; Ferl, R.J.; Simone, C.G. Microgravity effects on leaf
morphology, cell structure, carbon metabolism and mRNA expression of dwarf wheat. Planta 2006, 224,
1038–1049. [CrossRef]
77.
Kuznetsov, O.A.; Brown, C.S.; Levine, H.G.; Piastuch, W.C.; Sanwo-Lewandowski, M.M.; Hasenstein, K.H.
Composition and physical properties of starch in microgravity-grown plants. Adv. Space Res. 2001, 28,
651–658. [CrossRef]
78.
Charng, Y.Y.; Liu, H.C.; Liu, N.Y.; Chi, W.T.; Wang, C.N.; Chang, S.H.; Wang, T.T. A heat-inducible
transcription factor, HsfA2, is required for extension of acquired thermotolerance in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol.
2007, 143, 251–262. [CrossRef]
79.
Liu, H.C.; Charng, Y.Y. Common and distinct functions of Arabidopsis class A1 and A2 heat shock factors in
diverse abiotic stress responses and development. Plant Physiol. 2013, 163, 276–290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Hara, M. The multifunctionality of dehydrins: An overview. Plant Signal. Behav. 2010, 5, 503–508. [CrossRef]
81.
Medina, J.; Rodriguez-Franco, M.; Penalosa, A.; Carrascosa, M.J.; Neuhaus, G.; Salinas, J. Arabidopsis mutants
deregulated in RCI2A expression reveal new signaling pathways in abiotic stress responses. Plant J. 2005, 42,
586–597. [CrossRef]
82.
Nakashima, K.; Shinwari, Z.K.; Sakuma, Y.; Seki, M.; Miura, S.; Shinozaki, K.; Yamaguchi-Shinozaki, K.
Organization and expression of two Arabidopsis DREB2 genes encoding DRE-binding proteins involved in
dehydration- and high-salinity-responsive gene expression. Plant Mol. Biol. 2000, 42, 6657–6665. [CrossRef]
83.
Miller, G.; Mittler, R. Could heat shock transcription factors function as hydrogen peroxide sensors in plants?
Ann. Bot. 2006, 98, 279–288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Zhang, L.; Li, Y.; Xing, D.; Gao, C. Characterization of mitochondrial dynamics and subcellular localization
of ROS reveal that HsfA2 alleviates oxidative damage caused by heat stress in Arabidopsis. J. Exp. Bot. 2009,
60, 2073–2091. [CrossRef]
85.
Nishizawa-Yokoi, A.; Tainaka, H.; Yoshida, E.; Tamoi, M.; Yabuta, Y.; Shigeoka, S. The 26S proteasome
function and Hsp90 activity involved in the regulation of HsfA2 expression in response to oxidative stress.
Plant Cell Physiol. 2010, 51, 486–496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Gonzali, S.; Loreti, E.; Solfanelli, C.; Novi, G.; Alpi, A.; Perata, P. Identiﬁcation of sugar-modulated genes
and evidence for in vivo sugar sensing in Arabidopsis. J. Plant Res. 2006, 119, 115–123. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Fujiki, Y.; Ito, M.; Nishida, I.; Watanabe, A. Multiple signaling pathways in gene expression during sugar
starvation. Pharmacological analysis of din gene expression in suspension-cultured cells of Arabidopsis.
Plant Physiol. 2000, 124, 1139–1148. [CrossRef]
88.
Binder, S. Branched-Chain Amino Acid Metabolism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Arabidopsis Book 2010, 8, e0137.
[CrossRef]
89.
Kaufman, R.J.; Scheuner, D.; Schroder, M.; Shen, X.; Lee, K.; Liu, C.Y.; Arnold, S.M. The unfolded protein
response in nutrient sensing and differentiation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2002, 3, 411–421. [CrossRef]
90.
Clay, N.K.; Adio, A.M.; Denoux, C.; Jander, G.; Ausubel, F.M. Glucosinolate metabolites required for an
Arabidopsis innate immune response. Science 2009, 323, 95–101. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
35 of 36
91.
McHale, L.; Tan, X.; Koehl, P.; Michelmore, R.W. Plant NBS-LRR proteins: Adaptable guards. Genome Biol.
2006, 7, 212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Bhat, R.A.; Miklis, M.; Schmelzer, E.; Schulze-Lefert, P.; Panstruga, R. Recruitment and interaction dynamics
of plant penetration resistance components in a plasma membrane microdomain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2005, 102, 3135–3140. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Baek, D.; Pathange, P.; Chung, J.S.; Jiang, J.; Gao, L.; Oikawa, A.; Hirai, M.Y.; Saito, K.; Pare, P.W.; Shi, H.
A stress-inducible sulphotransferase sulphonates salicylic acid and confers pathogen resistance in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell Environ. 2010, 33, 1383–1392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94.
Kim, W.Y.; Jung, H.J.; Kwak, K.J.; Kim, M.K.; Oh, S.H.; Han, Y.S.; Kang, H. The Arabidopsis U12-type
spliceosomal protein U11/U12-31K is involved in U12 intron splicing via RNA chaperone activity and affects
plant development. Plant Cell 2010, 22, 3951–3962. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Hirose, T.; Shu, M.D.; Steitz, J.A. Splicing of U12-type introns deposits an exon junction complex competent
to induce nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004, 101, 17976–17981. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
96.
Meiri, D.; Tazat, K.; Cohen-Peer, R.; Farchi-Pisanty, O.; Aviezer-Hagai, K.; Avni, A.; Breiman, A. Involvement
of Arabidopsis ROF2 (FKBP65) in thermotolerance. Plant Mol. Biol. 2010, 72, 191–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Lu, D.P.; Christopher, D.A. Endoplasmic reticulum stress activates the expression of a sub-group of protein
disulﬁde isomerase genes and AtbZIP60 modulates the response in Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Genet. Genom.
2008, 280, 199–210. [CrossRef]
98.
Risseeuw, E.P.; Daskalchuk, T.E.; Banks, T.W.; Liu, E.; Cotelesage, J.; Hellmann, H.; Estelle, M.; Somers, D.E.;
Crosby, W.L. Protein interaction analysis of SCF ubiquitin E3 ligase subunits from Arabidopsis. Plant J. 2003,
34, 753–767. [CrossRef]
99.
Bednarek, P.; Pislewska-Bednarek, M.; Svatos, A.; Schneider, B.; Doubsky, J.; Mansurova, M.; Humphry, M.;
Consonni, C.; Panstruga, R.; Sanchez-Vallet, A.; et al. A glucosinolate metabolism pathway in living plant
cells mediates broad-spectrum antifungal defense. Science 2009, 323, 101–106. [CrossRef]
100. Nedukha, E.M. Effects of microgravity on the structure and function of plant cell walls. Int. Rev. Cytol. 1997,
170, 39–77.
101. Soga, K.; Wakabayashi, K.; Kamisaka, S.; Hoson, T. Stimulation of elongation growth and xyloglucan
breakdown in Arabidopsis hypocotyls under microgravity conditions in space. Planta 2002, 215, 1040–1046.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Maldonado-Calderon, M.T.; Sepulveda-Garcia, E.; Rocha-Sosa, M. Characterization of novel F-box proteins
in plants induced by biotic and abiotic stress. Plant Sci. 2012, 185, 208–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Widemann, E.; Miesch, L.; Lugan, R.; Holder, E.; Heinrich, C.; Aubert, Y.; Miesch, M.; Pinot, F.; Heitz, T.
The amidohydrolases IAR3 and ILL6 contribute to jasmonoyl-isoleucine hormone turnover and generate
12-hydroxyjasmonic acid upon wounding in Arabidopsis leaves. J. Biol. Chem. 2013, 288, 31701–31714.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Walley, J.W.; Coughlan, S.; Hudson, M.E.; Covington, M.F.; Kaspi, R.; Banu, G.; Harmer, S.L.; Dehesh, K.
Mechanical stress induces biotic and abiotic stress responses via a novel cis-element. PLoS Genet. 2007, 3,
e172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Joshi, V.; Joung, J.G.; Fei, Z.; Jander, G. Interdependence of threonine, methionine and isoleucine metabolism
in plants: Accumulation and transcriptional regulation under abiotic stress. Amino Acids 2010, 39, 933–947.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Desprez, T.; Juraniec, M.; Crowell, E.F.; Jouy, H.; Pochylova, Z.; Parcy, F.; Hofte, H.; Gonneau, M.; Vernhettes, S.
Organization of cellulose synthase complexes involved in primary cell wall synthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007, 104, 15572–15577. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Chevalier, D.; Batoux, M.; Fulton, L.; Pﬁster, K.; Yadav, R.K.; Schellenberg, M.; Schneitz, K. STRUBBELIG
deﬁnes a receptor kinase-mediated signaling pathway regulating organ development in Arabidopsis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 9074–9079. [CrossRef]
108. Antebi, A.; Fink, G.R. The yeast Ca2+-ATPase homologue, PMR1, is required for normal Golgi function and
localizes in a novel Golgi-like distribution. Mol. Biol. Cell 1992, 3, 633–654. [CrossRef]
109. Park, M.; Lee, D.; Lee, G.J.; Hwang, I. AtRMR1 functions as a cargo receptor for protein trafﬁcking to the
protein storage vacuole. J. Cell Biol. 2005, 170, 757–767. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390
36 of 36
110. Johnson, C.M.; Subramanian, A.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z. Morphometric analyses of petioles of seedlings
grown in a spaceﬂight experiment. J. Plant Res. 2015, 128, 1007–1016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Alonso, J.M.; Stepanova, A.N.; Leisse, T.J.; Kim, C.J.; Chen, H.; Shinn, P.; Stevenson, D.K.; Zimmerman, J.;
Barajas, P.; Cheuk, R.; et al. Genome-wide insertional mutagenesis of Arabidopsis thaliana. Science 2003, 301,
653–657. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
112. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing:
Vienna, Austria, 2012.
113. Smyth, G.K. Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray
experiments. Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol. 2004, 3, 3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Hubbell, E.; Liu, W.M.; Mei, R. Robust estimators for expression analysis. Bioinformatics 2002, 18, 1585–1592.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Du, Z.; Zhou, X.; Ling, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Su, Z. agriGO: A GO analysis toolkit for the agricultural community.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2010, 38, W64–W70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Obayashi, T.; Hayashi, S.; Saeki, M.; Ohta, H.; Kinoshita, K. ATTED-II provides coexpressed gene networks
for Arabidopsis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009, 37, D987–D991. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Reimand, J.; Kull, M.; Peterson, H.; Hansen, J.; Vilo, J. g:Proﬁler–a web-based toolset for functional proﬁling
of gene lists from large-scale experiments. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007, 35, W193–W200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
