 
International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
Impact of Spaceﬂight and Artiﬁcial Gravity on the
Mouse Retina: Biochemical and Proteomic Analysis
Xiao W. Mao 1,* ID , Stephanie Byrum 2,3 ID , Nina C. Nishiyama 1, Michael J. Pecaut 1,
Vijayalakshmi Sridharan 4, Marjan Boerma 4, Alan J. Tackett 2,3, Dai Shiba 5 ID ,
Masaki Shirakawa 5, Satoru Takahashi 6 and Michael D. Delp 7
1
Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences (BMES), Loma Linda University
School of Medicine and Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA; nnishiyama@llu.edu (N.C.N.);
mpecaut@llu.edu (M.J.P.)
2
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences,
Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.; sbyrum@uams.edu (S.B.); ajtackett@uams.edu (A.J.T.)
3
Arkansas Children’s Research Institute, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA
4
Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA; vmohanseenivasan@uams.edu (V.S.); mboerma@uams.edu (M.B.)
5
JEM Utilization Center, Human Spaceﬂight Technology Directorate, JAXA, Tsukuba 305-8505, Japan;
shiba.dai@jaxa.jp (D.S.); shirakawa.masaki@jaxa.jp (M.S.)
6
Department of Anatomy and Embryology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8575, Japan;
satoruta@md.tsukuba.ac.jp
7
Department of Nutrition, Food and Exercise Sciences, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA;
mdelp@fsu.edu
*
Correspondence: xmao@llu.edu; Tel.: +1-909-558-8373
Received: 28 June 2018; Accepted: 24 August 2018; Published: 28 August 2018


Abstract: Astronauts are reported to have experienced some impairment in visual acuity during their
mission on the International Space Station (ISS) and after they returned to Earth. There is emerging
evidence that changes in vision may involve alterations in ocular structure and function. To investigate
possible mechanisms, changes in protein expression proﬁles and oxidative stress-associated apoptosis
were examined in mouse ocular tissue after spaceﬂight.
Nine-week-old male C57BL/6 mice
(n = 12) were launched from the Kennedy Space Center on a SpaceX rocket to the ISS for a 35-day
mission. The animals were housed in the mouse Habitat Cage Unit (HCU) in the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) “Kibo” facility on the ISS. The ﬂight mice lived either under an ambient
microgravity condition (µg) or in a centrifugal habitat unit that produced 1 g artiﬁcial gravity
(µg + 1 g). Habitat control (HC) and vivarium control mice lived on Earth in HCUs or normal
vivarium cages, respectively. Quantitative assessment of ocular tissue demonstrated that the µg group
induced signiﬁcant apoptosis in the retina vascular endothelial cells compared to all other groups
(p < 0.05) that was 64% greater than that in the HC group. Proteomic analysis showed that many key
pathways responsible for cell death, cell repair, inﬂammation, and metabolic stress were signiﬁcantly
altered in µg mice compared to HC animals. Additionally, there were more signiﬁcant changes
in regulated protein expression in the µg group relative to that in the µg + 1 g group. These data
provide evidence that spaceﬂight induces retinal apoptosis of vascular endothelial cells and changes
in retinal protein expression related to cellular structure, immune response and metabolic function,
and that artiﬁcial gravity (AG) provides some protection against these changes. These retinal cellular
responses may affect blood–retinal barrier (BRB) integrity, visual acuity, and impact the potential risk
of developing late retinal degeneration.
Keywords:
spaceﬂight; ocular tissue; microgravity; artiﬁcial gravity; apoptosis; proteomics;
oxidative stress
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546; doi:10.3390/ijms19092546
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
2 of 15
1. Introduction
Approximately 30% of astronauts on short-term (~2 week) Space Shuttle ﬂights and 60% on
long-duration (~6 month) missions to the International Space Station (ISS) are reported to have
experienced some impairment in distant or near visual acuity [1]. Previous studies of rodents also
show that environmental conditions associated with spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity induce
alterations in retinal structure and function [2–4].
Retinal damage and degeneration can occur as a result of multiple factors, including aging,
ischemia, ﬂuctuation in oxygen tension, oxidative stress, and increased intraocular pressure.
Our previous data from Space Shuttle studies showed a signiﬁcant increase of apoptosis in retinal
cells of ﬂight mice compared to ground controls [2], which could lead to morphologic changes
and impairment of retinal function. However, the pathophysiological consequences and cellular
mechanisms of stress stimuli, especially those associated with a spaceﬂight environment, in facilitating
retinal damage are less studied and remain unclear.
Data on the response of biochemical systems to altered gravity is very limited in animal studies [5].
Some lines of evidence suggest that one of the mechanisms involved in response to spaceﬂight,
including changes in the gravity vector, is likely due to oxidative stress [2,6,7]. Studies have shown
that exposure to microgravity during spaceﬂights is associated with elevations in oxidative stress and
production of lipid peroxidation in both humans and rodents [8,9]. However, our knowledge about the
duration or dose of microgravity exposure needed to induce oxidative stress or alterations in retinal
structure and function is extremely limited. For example, one study has shown that even transient
exposure to microgravity produced by parabolic ﬂight can cause alterations in retinal vasculature to
occur [1]. One means to address the impact of microgravity conditions is through the application of
artiﬁcial gravity (AG) during spaceﬂight.
Creating AG by centrifugal force makes it possible to have a partial gravity or Earth-like gravity
(1 g) control in space, where all other environmental conditions associated with spaceﬂight are present.
A newly developed mouse habitat cage unit (HCU) by Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA)
has been installed in the Centrifuge-equipped Biological Experiment Facility (CBEF) on board the
ISS [10]. This rodent centrifugation capability provides opportunities to compare the effectiveness
of AG prescription under spaceﬂight conditions. Since the HCU can reproduce Earth-like gravity,
it can be used to test the effectiveness of AG to mitigate the effects of microgravity on physiological
systems [11].
The goal of the present study was to investigate the effects of spaceﬂight on oxidative stress and
apoptosis in retinal endothelial cells and to identify spaceﬂight-induced changes in protein expression
proﬁles in mouse ocular tissue. Additionally, we sought to determine whether the application
of 1 g AG during spaceﬂight could mitigate any detrimental effects of microgravity on the retina.
We hypothesized that spaceﬂight would induce elevations in oxidative stress and apoptosis in retinal
endothelial cells, as well as alter ocular proteins associated with apoptosis, cell repair, inﬂammation
and metabolic function. We further hypothesized that the application of 1 g AG would mitigate
these changes.
2. Results
2.1. Apoptosis in Retinal Endothelial Cells Following Spaceﬂight
Immunocytochemical analysis by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) assay showed that spaceﬂight conditions induced signiﬁcant apoptosis in the retinal
endothelial cells (Figure 1A) relative to that in the habitat and vivarium control conditions and
in the AG (µg + 1 g) condition. Our quantitative assessment revealed that the density of apoptotic
cells in the retina was the highest in the µg group, and was 64% greater than that in the habitat control
group (Figure 1B).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
3 of 15
2.2. 4-Hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) Immunoreactivity Following Spaceﬂight
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are involved in lipid peroxidation and membrane lipids
are among the major targets of ROS. The occurrence of lipid peroxidation was evaluated with
immunohistochemistry with an antibody against 4-HNE, which is an indicative marker of oxidative
damage to the retina (Figure 1C). There were no signiﬁcant differences among groups in the level of
4-HNE immunoreactivities (Figure 1D).
(A) 
 
(B) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Vivarium control Habitat control
µg
µg + 1g
Counts/mm2
a
Vivarium control 
μg   
μg+ 1g  
Habitat control 
Figure 1. Cont.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
4 of 15
 
  
 
 
(C) 
 
(D) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Vivarium control
Habitat control
µg
µg + 1g
Fluorscent Intensity
Vivarium control 
μg 
μg+1g 
Habitat control 
Figure 1.
(A) Apoptosis based on terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) staining of 9-week old male C57BL/6 mouse retinal tissue.
Groups (n = 6): Vivarium
control, habitat control, µg, and µg + 1 g. TUNEL-positive cells were identified with green fluorescence,
the endothelium was stained with lectin (red). The nuclei of photoreceptors were counterstained with
DAPI (blue). In the control retinal tissue, only sparse TUNEL-positive cells were found. In the retina from
µg mice, TUNEL-positive labeling was apparent in the retinal endothelial cells. Arrow: TUNEL-positive
endothelial cell. Outer nuclear layer (ONL); inner nuclear layer (INL); ganglion cell layer (GCL). Scale bar
= 50 µm; (B) immunoreactivity of TUNEL staining in the retinal endothelium. Values are represented
as mean density ± standard error of the mean (SEM) for a 6 mice/group, and the density profiles
were expressed as mean number of apoptotic positive cells/mm2. The mean of the density profile
measurements across 5 retina sections per eye was used as a single experimental value. a significantly
higher than all other groups (p < 0.05); (C) immunoreactivity of 4-HNE staining in the 9-week old
male C57BL/6 mouse retina. 4-HNE positive staining was identified with red fluorescence; the nuclei
were counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, blue). The vessel was stained with
tomato lectin (green). Scale bar = 50 µm; (D) the averages fluorescence intensity for 4-HNE activity were
measured and calculated using the ImageJ program. Fluorescence was averaged across 5 retinas per
group. Values are represented with mean + SEM. No significant differences among groups were detected.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
5 of 15
2.3. Proteomics on Mouse Ocular Tissue
Protein expression proﬁle analysis were focused on comparisons between ﬂight groups vs habitat
control (HC). Analyzing the proteomic changes induced by ﬂight conditions vs the HC group is
more relevant for determining the effects of weightlessness and AG since HC mice were placed in
the same ﬂight hardware (cages) used in ﬂight and environmental parameters such as temperature,
humidity and carbon dioxide (CO2) levels were matched to that during spaceﬂight. Five micrograms
of protein from each eyecup sample was resolved by 4–20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) Tris-Gly gel
electrophoresis, visualized by Coomassie stain, in-gel trypsin digested, and analyzed by LC/MS on
an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Figure 2A shows a gel image depicting one representative
sample for each of the three sample groups.
 
(A) 
(B) 
Figure 2.
Proteins identiﬁed from µg, µg + 1 g, and habitat controls (HC) by high-resolution
mass spectrometry.
(A) Five micrograms of protein was resolved by one-dimensional sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and visualized by Coomassie-staining.
Eyecups contain retinal layers were used for proteomic analysis. Samples were analyzed with six
biological replicates. Each gel lane was sliced into 24 equivalent sections. Protein in each gel slice was
digested in-gel with trypsin and identiﬁed by high-resolution mass spectrometry; (B) a Venn diagram
represents the number of total proteins identiﬁed from each group. Seventy-six percent of the proteins
were identiﬁed in all three groups.
A MaxQuant database search (restricted to Mus musculus) identiﬁed a total of 4179 proteins
from all 18 samples. A Venn diagram indicates that we identiﬁed 3174 (76%) common proteins in all
groups and, therefore, differences between the groups are reﬂective of the intensities of the proteins
detected (Figure 2B) [12]. A small percentage of proteins were uniquely identiﬁed in each of the
µg + 1 g, µg, and HC samples and may reﬂect speciﬁc changes within each group. The MS1 precursor
intensities were converted to relative iBAQ intensities by dividing the iBAQ intensity by the sum of all
iBAQ intensities in the sample [13]. The samples were normalized based on the median relative iBAQ
intensities for each sample, log2 transformed, and missing values were imputed based on the normal
distribution. The log2 normalized iBAQ intensities were used for analyses.
We identiﬁed 250 and 171 signiﬁcantly differentiating proteins comparing the µg versus HC and
µg + 1 g versus HC sample groups, respectively, based on a Mann–Whitney U test with a false discovery
rate (FDR) corrected p-value < 0.05. A hierarchical cluster was generated for both comparisons (Figure 3)

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
6 of 15
and visually representing the signiﬁcant protein intensities for each sample group. We further ﬁltered
the list of signiﬁcant proteins by using a fold change >2 threshold. By using a p-value and a protein
expression threshold, we were able to identify the top signiﬁcant proteins. These top signiﬁcant
proteins are seen in the heat maps as the clusters of proteins with the largest changes in intensity
(yellow to blue) (Figure 3). Volcano plots were used to visualize all identiﬁed proteins and highlight
the signiﬁcant proteins for each comparison in the study using R studio (Figure 4). The y-axis consists
of −log10 p-values based on the Mann–Whitney U FDR adjusted p-values, while the x-axis consists
of the log2 fold change. The vertical lines indicate up- and down expression using a fold change >2
threshold. The horizontal line indicates a p-value of 0.05. We identiﬁed 77 and 23 signiﬁcant proteins
based on these two criteria for the µg versus HC and µg + 1 g versus HC, respectively.
 
(A) 
(B) 
Figure 3. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of signiﬁcantly differentiating proteins. (A) Signiﬁcant
proteins between the µg versus habitat controls (HC). 250 Signiﬁcant proteins based on false discovery
rate (FDR) adjusted (p < 0.05); (B) signiﬁcant proteins between µg + 1 g versus HC. 171 Signiﬁcant
proteins based on FDR adjusted (p < 0.05). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the log2 normalized
iBAQ intensities for signiﬁcantly differentiating proteins was performed using the Euclidean distance
metric with oheatmap R package. The hierarchical cluster was generated for comparison and visually
represents the signiﬁcant protein intensities for each sample group. The intensities were standardized
by the mean and standard deviation before clustering. Proteins were considered signiﬁcant based on
Mann–Whitney U FDR corrected p-value < 0.05.
These differentially expressed proteins were then analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
(IPA, QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity) [14]. There were signiﬁcant changes in
canonical pathways and upstream regulators in the pathway analysis for ﬂight groups compared
to the HC controls. Our proteomic analysis identiﬁed only 33 upstream regulator proteins based
on the Z-scores used to predict either activation (Z-score > 0) or inhibition (Z-score < 0) in the µg +
1 g animals compared to HC mice that involves disease development, molecular/cellular function
and cell signaling, while 60 regulators were identiﬁed in the µg group compared to HC mice. IPA
analysis revealed many key pathways are affected that are responsible for cell death, cell repair,
inﬂammation, carbohydrate metabolism, mitochondrial function, fatty acid metabolism, and oxidative
phosphorylation when comparing the µg group with HC group. Pathways were considered signiﬁcant

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
7 of 15
based on the Fisher exact test with a −log10 p-value > 1.3 (corresponds to a p-value < 0.05). Signiﬁcantly
affected canonical pathways between µg + 1 g vs. HC or µg group vs HC or are shown in Figure 5A,B,
respectively. There were also signiﬁcant changes in regulated protein expression in the pathway
analysis for µg or µg + 1 g groups compared to HC group or µg group vs. µg + 1 g group. There was very
little overlap of signiﬁcantly regulated protein between µg vs. HC and µg + 1 g vs. HC. In the µg group,
there was signiﬁcant alteration in functions related to overall organismal survival, cellular assembly
and metabolism. Signiﬁcant increased or decreased protein expression levels are summarized and
listed in Tables 1–3.
 
(A) 77 significant run in IPA 
(B) 23 significant run in IPA 
Figure 4. Volcano plots show differentially expressed proteins (FDR adjusted p < 0.05 and fold change
>2). (A) µg versus HC: 77 signiﬁcant run in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA); (B) µg + 1 g versus HC:
23 signiﬁcant run in IPA. Volcano plots were generated based on fold-change of protein levels using the
log2 normalized iBAQ intensities from six biological replicates. The x-axis indicates a log2 fold-change
and the y-axis indicates −log10 p-value based on a Mann–Whitney U test with a FDR adjusted p-value.
The horizontal line indicates a p-value < 0.05 and the vertical lines represent a fold-change >2.
 
(A) 
Figure 5. Cont.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
8 of 15
 
(B) 
Figure 5. (A) IPA of top canonical pathways altered between µg and habitat control (HC) ocular tissue;
(B) IPA of top canonical pathways altered between µg + 1 g and HC ocular tissue. −log10 (p-value) ≥
1.3 = signiﬁcant at p ≤0.05. The differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by IPA.
Table 1. Differentially expressed proteins identiﬁed by IPA in the mouse retina in response to µg vs.
habitat control (fold change >2; FDR corrected p < 0.05).
Protein Names
Function
Fold-Changes
MECP2
Cell cycle, neurological disorder
5.85
TMEM 109
Cell death and survival, neurological disease
3.69
S100A10
Cell cycle
3.19
HECT D4
Neuronal signaling
2.04
XPO 1
Cell cycle
2.02
CLIP2
Neuronal cell structure and function
−2.96
SOGA3
Glucose metabolism
−2.94
CBFB
Cell repair
−2.83
RAB6A
Cellular assembly
−2.63
PYGB
Immune cell trafﬁcking
−2.58
HSD17B12
Cell death and survival
−2.57
RUVBL2
Cell repair
−2.42
NPLOC4
Cellular organization
−2.29
DAP3
Apoptosis
−2.25
SGCA
Cell cycle
−2.24
Table 2. Differentially expressed proteins identiﬁed by IPA in the mouse retina in response to µg + 1 g
vs. habitat control (fold change >2; FDR corrected p < 0.05).
Protein Names
Function
Fold-Changes
CAPN3
Molecular transport
7.38
CAVIN2
Vascular permeability
−3.93
EDC4
Lipid metabolism
−2.94
KLC2
Cell death and survival
−2.87
ClIP2
Neuronal cell structure and function
−2.74
MAP4
Lipid metabolism
−2.22

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
9 of 15
Table 3. Differentially expressed proteins identiﬁed by IPA in the ocular tissue in response to µg vs. µg
+ 1 g (fold change >2, FDR corrected p < 0.05).
Protein Names
Function
Fold-Changes
RPL10
Cell death and survival
4.60
C3
Cell morphology and assembly
4.29
CLASP1
Cell assembly and organization
4.26
HDGFL2
Angiogenesis and neuronal signaling
4.22
RPS27L
Protein synthesis
4.16
THTPA
Protein phosphorylation
3.91
TPM1
Cell structure and function
3.91
NCND
Cell cycle
3.76
RPL23
Protein catabolism
3.69
CNPYS
Cellular metabolism
−6.27
ITGA5
Cell signaling
−5.93
SF3A2
Cell signaling
−5.42
ENOPH1
Cellular structure
−4.60
SMUG1
Cellular organization and repair
−4.02
KYAT3
Cell metabolism
−3.86
FBXO22
Protein catabolism
−3.03
3. Discussion
The current study demonstrates that spaceﬂight induces apoptosis in retinal vascular endothelial
cells. We also identiﬁed spaceﬂight-induced changes in proteomic proﬁles and pathways in the ocular
tissue. The results indicate that spaceﬂight induces changes in neuronal structure, cellular organization,
mitochondrial function and oxidative phosphorylation and inﬂammation which, in turn, may lead to
tissue injury and late neurodegeneration. This study is the ﬁrst to investigate the role of AG provided
by centrifugation during spaceﬂight as a countermeasure for mitigating putative effects of microgravity
on ocular structure and function.
In our study, several oxidative stress-related signaling pathways are signiﬁcantly altered in the
µg group, which includes fatty acid β-oxidation I, fatty acid activation and α-adrenergic pathway.
However, we did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant change in an oxidative stress marker for lipid peroxidation,
4-HNE when measured two days after splash-down. In our previous space shuttle Atlantis (STS-135)
study, the level of HNE protein was signiﬁcantly elevated in the retina after spaceﬂight compared to
controls [2]. This is not surprising as these two ﬂight conditions are different. Female C57BL/6 mice
were ﬂown in the STS-135 for 13-day mission, and within 3–5 h of landing, eyes were removed for
analysis. In the current study, male mice were ﬂown to the ISS for a 35-day mission, and the mice were
euthanized at about 40 h after splashing down. Differences in gender, mission duration and recovery
time might contribute to their dynamic stress response. The level of oxidative stress can be affected
by their stress reaction to a prolonged ﬂight in space and in the period of re-adaptation to the normal
gravity after landing [15]. Another possible explanation for the lack of signiﬁcant change in 4-HNE in
the current study is that spaceﬂight might elicit protective effects in the central nervous system (CNS)
by inhibiting some gravity-initiated stress signaling pathway.
Of all the proteins signiﬁcantly altered by spaceﬂight, the Cap-Gly domain containing linker
protein 2 (CLIP2), also known as CLIP-115, was signiﬁcantly down-regulated in both µg and µg + 1 g
groups. This protein is found predominantly in the CNS, where it likely plays a role in the normal
structure and function of nerve cells. Within cells, this protein is thought to regulate cell cytoskeleton
function that helps to determine cell shape, size, and movement [16–20]. Figure 6A illustrates CLIP2
in the network of proteins responsible for cellular assembly and organization, cell signaling and
interaction as deﬁned by IPA in response to spaceﬂight.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
10 of 15
(A) 
(B) 
Figure 6. (A) Impact of spaceﬂight condition (µg group) on CLIP2 expression in the network of proteins
responsible for cellular assembly and organization, cell signaling and interaction. Red = up-regulated
(p < 0.05). Grey = un-changed. Green = down-regulated (p < 0.05); (B) Impact of spaceﬂight condition
(µg group) on MECP2 protein expression in the network of proteins involving in cell death and survival
response. Red = up-regulated (p < 0.05). Grey = un-changed. Green = down-regulated. (A,B) are
generated with IPA software. More detailed description of the legends (squares, circles, etc.) can be
found at the Ingenuity Systems website.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
11 of 15
Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) had the highest fold changes in ﬂight mice (µg group)
compared to HC. This protein binds to methylated DNA and regulates chromatin structure and
transcription [21,22]. MECP2 is most abundantly produced in the brain where it is expressed primarily
in post-mitotic neurons [23]. Previous work has also shown MECP2 mediated epigenetic regulation
of senescent endothelial progenitor cells and promoted apoptosis [24]. Furthermore, a recent study
provides evidence that elevated MECP2 in mice causes neurodegeneration [25]. Figure 6B shows the
regulative role of MECP2 in a network of proteins that involves cell death and survival.
The data from this study indicates that adding 1 g on the ISS is effective in reducing the
endothelial cell damage and increasing cellular organization and function compared to the µg group.
Another study of the same animals used in our present study also showed that 1 g AG served to
maintain femur bone density and soleus/gastrocnemius muscle mass similar to that in the ground
control group, whereas signiﬁcant decreases in bone density and muscle mass occurred in the ﬂight
mice without centrifuge [10]. These studies provide evidence that in-ﬂight AG can mitigate some
of the effects of weightlessness during spaceﬂight. Further investigation will be needed to deﬁne
the relationship between gravitational dose/time and physiological response by assessing retinal
physiological endpoints and function. More rodent centrifugation studies on board the ISS are also
needed to provide comprehensive information to compare the effectiveness of the AG prescription in
other physiological systems during weightless conditions.
4. Material and Methods
4.1. Spaceﬂight and Mouse Condition
Twelve male 9-week old C57BL/6 male mice, obtained from a US breeding colony, were launched
18 July 2016, at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) on a SpaceX-9 rocket for the 35-day MHU-1 mission
to the ISS. The animals were housed in the mouse HCU located in the JAXA “Kibo” facility on the ISS.
The 12 ﬂight mice were subdivided into two groups. The ﬁrst group of ﬂight mice (n = 6) were exposed
to ambient microgravity conditions (µg group), while the second group of ﬂight mice (n = 6) were
exposed to continuous artiﬁcial Earth gravity (µg + 1 g group) while they were in the HCU. AG was
achieved through the use of a short-arm centrifuge for the duration of their stay on the ISS. The ﬂight
mice were then returned live to Earth and splashed down in the Paciﬁc Ocean on 26 August 2016.
It took approximately 40 h for the mice to be recovered in the Paciﬁc Ocean, brought to shore and
transported to the testing and processing laboratory located in San Diego, California on 28 August
2016. The spaceﬂight mice were then euthanized and their eyes were removed and prepared for
analysis. Ground control mouse studies were completed in Japan after the return of the ﬂight mice.
Control mice (habitat controls, n = 6; vivarium controls, n = 6) were acquired on 31 August 2016 from a
breeding colony in Japan and shipped to the JAXA animal facility in Tsukuba, Japan. HC mice were
acclimated to the water lixit system and the same special food bar diet as the space ﬂown mice were
fed. They were ﬁrst housed in the transportation cage unit (TCU) to simulate launch and ﬂight to
the ISS, and then placed in the HCUs to simulate the housing conditions experienced by µg mice on
the ISS. They were again placed in the TCU to simulate the return to Earth ﬂight. The control mouse
dissections took place on 3 November 2016. Control mouse eye tissue was then shipped to the US for
analysis. All mice received the same ad libitum access to food and water. A detailed description of the
ﬂight schedule and mouse information has been previously reported [11].
The Loma Linda University (LLU) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) was
consulted, but no protocol was required since only archived frozen and ﬁxed tissues were obtained
after euthanasia. However, animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee of University of Tsukuba (No. 16-048), Explora Biolabs (Study Number: EB15-010)
on 23 May 2016, JAXA (Protocol Number: 016-014B) on 2 June 2016 and NASA (Protocol Number:
NAS-15-004-Y1) on 31 May 2016, and the research with vertebrate animals are done in strict accordance
with guidelines and applicable laws in Japan and the United States of America.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
12 of 15
4.2. Dissecting and Preservation of Mouse Eyes after Spaceﬂight
Within 2 days of splashing down, mice were euthanized and their eyes were harvested.
The posterior half of the right eyecup containing the retina layer, optic disc and a short segment
of the optic nerve was placed individually in sterile cryovials, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept
at −80 ◦C prior to use. The left eyes were ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) for immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays.
4.3. Immunohistochemistry Assays and Histology
Six µm sections were cut through each eye, and sections were roughly 100 µm apart providing
10 sections per eye for analysis. To characterize apoptosis, 5 sections were subjected to a terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining. Parafﬁn-embedded sections
were deparafﬁnized in Histo-Clear, then permeabilized in proteinase K solution. Stained sections were
evaluated using the DeadEnd™Fluorometric TUNEL system kit (catalog no. G3250, Promega Corp.,
Madison, WI, USA). The same sections were then incubated with DyLight 594 Lycopersicon
esculantum-Lectin (catalog no: DL-11721, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) at a 1:100
dilution for 30 min at room temperature to stain the endothelium. Nuclei were counterstained with
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, blue). Sections were examined using a BZ-X710 All-in-One inverted
ﬂuorescence microscope with structural illumination (Keyence Corp., Elmwood Park, NJ, USA).
TUNEL-positive cells were identiﬁed by green ﬂuorescence, vascular endothelium were identiﬁed
with red ﬂuorescence. TUNEL-positive cells that were laid within red lectin-labeled endothelium were
identiﬁed as TUNEL-positive endothelial cells.
For quantitative analysis, the total number of TUNEL-positive endothelial cells in the retina were
determined in 5 sections of each eye. The area of the retina was measured on digital microphotographs
using ImageJ counting plugin 1.41 software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA;
http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/), and the density proﬁles were expressed as mean number of apoptotic
positive cells/mm2. The mean of the density proﬁle measurements across 5 retina sections per eye was
used as a single experimental value.
Immunoﬂuorescence staining for an oxidative damage marker on ocular sections was also
performed using an anti-4-HNE antibody. Five sections were incubated with the anti-4-HNE antibody
(catalog no. HNE11-S, Alpha Diagnostic International Inc., San Antonio, TX, USA) at 4 ◦C for 2 h
followed by a donkey anti-rabbit IgG ﬂuorescence-conjugated secondary antibody (catalog no. A21206,
Invitrogen Corp., Waltham, MA, USA) for 2 h at room temperature and counterstained with DAPI.
To determine 4-HNE immunoreactivity, ﬂuorescence intensity was measured on each section and
calculated using ImageJ software. Once the green channel was separated from the red channel in an
image, ﬂuorescence intensities from the areas of interest were measured using the integral/density
feature in the ImageJ program and data were extracted and averaged within the group. Fluorescence
was averaged across 5 retinas per group in retinal nuclear layers. Data were normalized with respect
to controls. The values were represented as fold changes over controls.
4.4. Mass Spectrometry
Protein expression proﬁles of ocular tissue containing the retina were determined in eighteen mice
(n = 6/group) from three sample groups: µg, µg + 1 g, and HC, using high resolution mass spectrometry.
Five micrograms of protein lysate were resolved by a 4–20% Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE
(Life Technologies Corp., Waltham, MA, USA). The gel was sliced into 24 gel slices that were 2 mm
thick for each sample. Gel slices were destained in 50% methanol (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Hampton,
NH, USA), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), followed by
reduction in 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Pierce, Dallas, TX, USA) and alkylation in
50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Gel slices were then dehydrated in acetonitrile (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc), followed by addition of 100 ng porcine sequencing grade modiﬁed trypsin (Promega

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
13 of 15
Corp.) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37 ◦C for 12–16 h.
Peptide products were then acidiﬁed in 0.1% formic acid (Pierce). Tryptic peptides were separated by
reverse phase Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) on a 100 × 0.075 mm column
using a nanoAcquity Ultra Performance LC™(UPLC™) system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA).
Peptides were eluted using a 30 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio. (Buffer A = 0.1%
formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were
ionized by electrospray (1.9 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using collision-induced dissociation
on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). MS data were acquired
using the Fourier Transform ion cyclotron resonance spectrometry (FTMS) analyzer in proﬁle mode
at a resolution of 60,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. MS/MS data were acquired for the top
15 peaks from each MS scan using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with
a normalized collision energy of 35.0.
4.5. Data Analysis
Proteins were identiﬁed by searching the UniProtKB database (2017-03 release; restricted to
Mus musculus; 81,557 entries) using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4,
Max Planck Institute of biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Search parameters were as follows:
trypsin digestion with up to three missed cleavages; ﬁxed modiﬁcation of carbamidomethyl of cysteine;
variable modiﬁcations of oxidation on methionine and acetyl on N-terminus; ﬁrst search set to 5 ppm
precursor ion tolerance and the main search was set to 3 ppm; selected label-free quantitation with
iBAQ with a minimum ratio of 1. A contaminants database was used for the ﬁrst search to identify
commonly identiﬁed contaminants.
The MaxQuant iBAQ values for each sample were converted to relative iBAQ (riBAQ) intensities
by dividing the iBAQ intensity for each protein by the sum of all iBAQ intensities for all proteins
identiﬁed in the sample. The median of all relative iBAQ intensities for each sample was then
used to normalize between the samples. The adjusted riBAQ intensities were then imported into
Perseus (version 1.5.6.0, Max Planck Institute of biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Perseus was
used to log2 transform the data and impute the missing values using a normal distribution with
a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 2 standard deviations. Non-parametric Mann–Whitney U tests
were used to compare habitat control with the µg and µg + 1 g groups separately. The p-values were
corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg to account for multiple testing. Fold changes were also calculated
for each comparison. Proteins that were signiﬁcant by the FDR-adjusted p-value < 0.05 and that
had a fold change greater than 2 were considered to be differentially expressed. The heat maps
were generated using the Euclidean distance metric and the data was standardized by the mean and
standard deviation before performing hierarchical clustering with pheatmap R package (maintained
by Raivo Kolde, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA). Volcano plots were generated
using R. These proteins were then analyzed using the IPA pathway analysis.
4.6. Statistical Analysis
The results obtained from all experiments were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post hoc multiple-comparison test (Sigma Plot for Windows,
version 13.0; Systat Software, Inc., Point Richmond, CA, USA). The signiﬁcance level was set at
p < 0.05. Data are shown as mean ± standard error (SEM).
5. Conclusions
The current data demonstrate that spaceﬂight induces apoptosis in vascular endothelial cells of
the retina. Such changes to vasculature endothelial cells could serve to impair barrier function
of the BRB and compromise the ﬁdelity of intraocular pressure regulation.
Study results also
show acute changes in the protein expression proﬁle of space-ﬂown and centrifuged mouse retina.
Diverse spaceﬂight-induced alterations in protein-expression proﬁles suggest broader changes in

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
14 of 15
eye structure and function. If such alterations occur in the eyes of astronauts, these changes could
contribute to acute and sustained modiﬁcations in astronauts’ visual acuity. Further studies are needed
to elucidate the possible mechanism(s) by which changes in protein-expression proﬁles are mediated
and their structural and functional consequences.
Author Contributions: X.W.M. and M.D.D. conceived and designed the study. X.W.M., S.B., N.C.N., M.J.P.,
V.S. analyzed data. X.W.M. and S.B. wrote the original draft paper. M.B., A.J.T., D.S., M.S., S.T., M.D.D. reviewed
and edited the paper.
Acknowledgments: This is the ﬁrst NASA-JAXA collaboration for rodent tissue sharing and is promoted
under the “Japan-U.S. Open Platform Partnership Program (JP-US OP3)”.
This work was supported by
NASA Space Biology grant NNX15AE86G, National Institutes of Health grant P20GM121293, UL1TR000039,
P20GM103625, S10OD018445 and P20GM103429, and LLU Department of Basic Sciences. The authors would like
to acknowledge the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Proteomics Facility, especially Lisa M. Orr and
Samuel G. Mackintosh for their technical support, and Arkansas Children’s Research Institute Developmental
Bioinformatics Core.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Mader, T.H.; Gibson, C.R.; Pass, A.F.; Kramer, L.A.; Lee, A.G.; Fogarty, J.; Tarver, W.J.; Dervay, J.P.;
Hamilton, D.R.; Sargsyan, A.; et al. Optic disc edema, globe ﬂattening, choroidal folds, and hyperopic shifts
observed in astronauts after long-duration space ﬂight. Ophthalmology 2011, 118, 2058–2069. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2.
Mao, X.W.; Pecaut, M.J.; Stodieck, L.S.; Ferguson, V.L.; Bateman, T.A.; Bouxsein, M.; Jones, T.A.;
Moldovan, M.; Cunningham, C.E.; Chieu, J.; et al. Space ﬂight environment induces mitochondrial oxidative
damage in ocular tissue. Radiat. Res. 2013, 180, 340–350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Zhao, H.W.; Zhao, J.; Hu, L.N.; Liang, J.N.; Shi, Y.Y.; Nie, C.; Qiu, C.Y.; Nan, X.S.; Li, Y.X.; Gao, F.L.; et al.
Effect of long-term weightlessness on retina and optic nerve in tail-suspension rats. Int. J. Ophthalmol. 2016,
9, 825–830. [PubMed]
4.
Tombran-Tink, J.; Barnstable, C.J. Space ﬂight environment induces degeneration in the retina of rat neonates.
In Retinal Degenerative Diseases; Joe, G.H., Robert, E.A., Matthew, M.L., Eds.; Springer: Boston, MA, USA,
2006; pp. 417–424.
5.
Wade, C.E. Responses across the gravity continuum: Hypergravity to microgravity. Adv. Space Biol. Med.
2005, 10, 225–245. [PubMed]
6.
Zhang, R.; Ran, H.H.; Ma, J.; Bai, Y.G.; Lin, L.J. NAD(P)H oxidase inhibiting with apocynin improved vascular
reactivity in tail-suspended hindlimb unweighting rat. J. Physiol. Biochem. 2012, 68, 99–105. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
7.
Chen, H.L.; Qu, L.N.; Li, Q.D.; Bi, L.; Huang, Z.M.; Li, Y.H. Simulated microgravity-induced oxidative stress
in different areas of rat brain. Sheng Li Xue Bao 2009, 61, 108–114. [PubMed]
8.
Yang, T.B.; Zhong, P.; Qu, L.N.; Yuan, Y.H. Space ﬂight and peroxidative damage. Space Med. Med. Eng. 2003,
16, 455–458.
9.
Zhan, H.; Chen, L.M.; Xin, Y.M.; Tang, G.X.; Wen, J. Effects of tea polyphenols on cerebral lipid peroxidation,
liver and renal functions in rats after repeated +Gz stress. Space Med. Med. Eng. 1999, 12, 1–5.
10.
Shiba, D.; Mizuno, H.; Yumoto, A.; Shimomura, M.; Kobayashi, H.; Morita, H.; Shimbo, M.; Hamada, M.;
Kudo, T.; Shinohara, M.; et al.
Development of new experimental platform ‘MARS’—Multiple
Artiﬁcial-gravity Research System—To elucidate the impacts of micro/partial gravity on mice. Sci. Rep. 2017,
7, 10837. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Clement, G. International roadmap for artiﬁcial gravity research. NPJ Microgravity 2017, 3, 29. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12.
Oliveros, J.C. An Interactive Tool for Comparing Lists with Venn’s Diagrams. Available online: http:
//bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html (accessed on 5 September 2017).
13.
Krey, J.F.; Wilmarth, P.A.; Shin, J.B.; Klimek, J.; Sherman, N.E.; Jeffery, E.D.; Choi, D.; David, L.L.;
Barr-Gillespie, P.G. Accurate label-free protein quantitation with high-and low-resolution mass spectrometers.
J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 1034–1044. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 2546
15 of 15
14.
Krämer, A.; Green, J.; Pollard, J.; Tugendreich, S. Causal analysis approaches in ingenuity pathway analysis.
Bioinformatics 2014, 30, 523–530. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Grigor’ev, A.I.; Fedorov, B.M. Stress under normal, hypokinesia simulating weightlessness, and during
ﬂights in space. Hum. Physiol. 1996, 22, 139–147. [PubMed]
16.
De Zeeuw, C.I.; Hoogenraad, C.C.; Goedknegt, E.; Hertzberg, E.; Neubauer, A.; Grosveld, F.; Galjart, N.
CLIP-115, a novel brain-speciﬁc cytoplasmic linker protein, mediates the localization of dendritic lamellar
bodies. Neuron 1997, 19, 1187–1199. [CrossRef]
17.
Hoogenraad, C.C.; Akhmanova, A.; Galjart, N.; de Zeeuw, C.I. LIMK1 and CLIP-115: Linking cytoskeletal
defects to Williams syndrome. Bioessays 2004, 26, 141–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Hoogenraad, C.C.; Akhmanova, A.; Grosveld, F.; de Zeeuw, C.I.; Galjart, N. Functional analysis of CLIP-115
and its binding to microtubules. J. Cell Sci. 2000, 113, 2285–2297. [PubMed]
19.
Meyer-Lindenberg, A.; Mervis, C.B.; Berman, K.F. Neural mechanisms in Williams syndrome: A unique
window to genetic inﬂuences on cognition and behavior. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2006, 7, 380–393. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
20.
Meyer-Lindenberg, A.; Mervis, C.B.; Sarpal, D.; Koch, P.; Steele, S.; Kohn, P.; Marenco, S.; Morris, C.A.; Das, S.;
Kippenhan, S.; et al. Functional, structural, and metabolic abnormalities of the hippocampal formation in
Williams syndrome. J. Clin. Investig. 2005, 115, 1888–1895. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Adkins, N.L.; Georgel, P.T. MeCP2: Structure and function. Biochem. Cell Biol. 2011, 89, 1–11. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
22.
Guy, J.; Cheval, H.; Selfridge, J.; Bird, A. The role of MeCP2 in the brain. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 2011, 27,
631–652. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Ausio, J.; de Paz, A.M.; Esteller, M. MeCP2: The long trip from a chromatin protein to neurological disorders.
Trends Mol. Med. 2014, 20, 487–498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Wang, C.; Wang, F.; Li, Z.; Cao, Q.; Huang, L.; Chen, S. MeCP2-mediated epigenetic regulation in senescent
endothelial progenitor cells. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2018, 9, 87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Montgomery, K.R.; Titus, A.L.S.; Wang, L.; D’Mello, S.R. Elevated MeCP2 in Mice Causes Neurodegeneration
Involving Tau Dysregulation and Excitotoxicity: Implications for the Understanding and Treatment of
MeCP2 Triplication Syndrome. Mol. Neurobiol. 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
