APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Sept. 2011, p. 6368–6378
Vol. 77, No. 18
0099-2240/11/$12.00
doi:10.1128/AEM.00175-11
Copyright © 2011, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.
Induction of Attachment-Independent Bioﬁlm Formation and Repression of
hfq Expression by Low-Fluid-Shear Culture of Staphylococcus aureus
Sarah L. Castro,1 Mayra Nelman-Gonzalez,2 Cheryl A. Nickerson,3 and C. Mark Ott4*
Department of Microbiology & Immunology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 775551; Human Adaptation and
Countermeasures Division, Wyle Integrated Science and Engineering, Houston, Texas 770582; Biodesign Institute, Center for
Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 852873; and Habitability and
Environmental Factors Division, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas 770584
Received 25 January 2011/Accepted 20 July 2011
The opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus encounters a wide variety of ﬂuid shear levels within the
human host, and they may play a key role in dictating whether this organism adopts a commensal interaction
with the host or transitions to cause disease. By using rotating-wall vessel bioreactors to create a physiolog-
ically relevant, low-ﬂuid-shear environment, S. aureus was evaluated for cellular responses that could impact
its colonization and virulence. S. aureus cells grown in a low-ﬂuid-shear environment initiated a novel
attachment-independent bioﬁlm phenotype and were completely encased in extracellular polymeric substances.
Compared to controls, low-shear-cultured cells displayed slower growth and repressed virulence characteris-
tics, including decreased carotenoid production, increased susceptibility to oxidative stress, and reduced
survival in whole blood. Transcriptional whole-genome microarray proﬁling suggested alterations in metabolic
pathways. Further genetic expression analysis revealed downregulation of the RNA chaperone Hfq, which
parallels low-ﬂuid-shear responses of certain Gram-negative organisms. This is the ﬁrst study to report an Hfq
association with ﬂuid shear in a Gram-positive organism, suggesting an evolutionarily conserved response to
ﬂuid shear among structurally diverse prokaryotes. Collectively, our results suggest S. aureus responds to a
low-ﬂuid-shear environment by initiating a bioﬁlm/colonization phenotype with diminished virulence charac-
teristics, which could lead to insight into key factors inﬂuencing the divergence between infection and coloni-
zation during the initial host-pathogen interaction.
Fluctuations in ﬂuid shear are encountered by pathogenic
microorganisms as they occupy various host sites throughout
the course of infection and/or during colonization (46). This is
especially true for the opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus
aureus, which is able to adapt to and proliferate under a variety
of environmental conditions, thus enabling high morbidity and
mortality rates (32). The dissemination of S. aureus through a
host exposes the organism to signiﬁcant variations in ﬂuid
shear. For example, high levels of ﬂuid shear (10 to 70 dynes/
cm2) are encountered within the arterial blood vessels (41),
whereas areas of low ﬂuid shear could be experienced within
the intestines (less than 5 dynes/cm2) (24). Studies on the
impact of ﬂuid shear on S. aureus have demonstrated that
bacterial adherence is directly dependent on shear rate (44).
Furthermore, in response to varied levels of ﬂuid ﬂux, varia-
tions on the staphylococcal cell have been investigated using
ﬂow chambers to determine changes in the presence of micro-
bial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix mole-
cules, MSCRAMMs, which are involved in the ability of S.
aureus to colonize (53). These investigations demonstrated
that the S. aureus MSCRAMMs function in a shear-dependent
manner, whereby the binding efﬁciency to host factors peaks
under conditions of low ﬂuid shear (50, 54).
Previous investigations have also demonstrated the ability of
S. aureus to sense and respond to ﬂuid shear ﬂux by altering
bioﬁlm architecture (31, 63). Speciﬁcally, studies of indwelling
medical devices have indicated that S. aureus is an efﬁcient
bioﬁlm former under various degrees of ﬂuid shear (31, 63).
The impact of ﬂuid shear on staphylococcal bioﬁlms has re-
sulted in correlations between physiological levels of oscilla-
tory shear stress and bioﬁlm morphology and tolerance to
antibiotics (31). Those investigations determined that the most
turbulent ﬂow conditions resulted in the thickest bioﬁlm mor-
phology and highest level of antibiotic resistance (31). More-
over, in response to ﬂuid shear, the viscoelasticity of S. aureus
bioﬁlms permits them to remain attached yet undergo rolling
migration, thereby promoting bacterial dispersal while remain-
ing in the protected bioﬁlm state (63). However, the role of low
ﬂuid shear levels, in relation to bioﬁlm formation and down-
stream staphylococcal responses, is unclear.
Approximately 60% of the human population intermittently
carries S. aureus, with the highest isolation rates from the nasal
pharynx (30). The isolation of S. aureus in stool samples and
rectal sites is not uncommon, with previous studies demon-
strating the presence of the same strain repeatedly isolated
from the nose and stool samples/rectal sites of the same indi-
viduals over long periods of time (1, 15, 61), suggesting that the
organism either repeatedly passes from the nose through the
digestive system or maintains a long-term presence in the gas-
trointestinal tract. Thus, the passage through the gastrointes-
tinal tract exposes S. aureus to various environmental condi-
tions, including those present in the intestine. Cells within the
intestine, both host epithelium and inhabiting microbes, are
exposed to various levels of ﬂuid shear (4). A bolus moving
through the center of the lumen creates the highest shear level,
* Corresponding author. Mailing address: 2101 NASA Parkway,
Mail Code SF24, Houston, TX 77058. Phone: (281) 483-7155. Fax:
(281) 483-3058. E-mail: c.m.ott@nasa.gov.
 Published ahead of print on 29 July 2011.
6368

which decreases with proximity toward the intestinal wall. The
mucus layer provides a barrier that greatly reduces shear rates
(55). It has been postulated that if the intestinal epithelial cells
lacked microvilli, the ﬂuid shear stress they would experience
would be in the range of 1 to 5 dynes/cm2; however, the pres-
ence of microvilli further reduces the shear rates around these
cells to less than 1 dyne/cm2 (24). The viscoelastic properties of
the mucus layer itself provide protection for objects within the
mucus from high shear rates (7). As a well-established intesti-
nal colonizer (1, 8, 16, 28, 61) that adheres to intestinal mucus
(70), S. aureus is exposed to the low ﬂuid shear levels descrip-
tive of this site.
To facilitate studies in which planktonic microorganisms can
be subjected to physiologically relevant levels of ﬂuid shear,
investigations have capitalized on the low-shear environment
produced in NASA-designed rotating-wall vessel (RWV) bio-
reactors, which were originally used as spaceﬂight analog cell
culture systems (49). The RWV is a thin, cylindrical vessel (Fig.
1A) that, when completely ﬁlled with culture medium and
rotated on an axis parallel to the ground, results in solid body
rotation (49). Microorganisms in this environment are main-
tained in suspension (Fig. 1C) and experience a physiological
low level of ﬂuid shear over their cell surface, previously de-
scribed as low-shear-modeled microgravity (LSMMG) (46, 49).
Mathematical modeling has demonstrated that the ﬂuid shear
level within the RWV is less than 1 dyne/cm2 and that incre-
mental increases in ﬂuid shear levels in the RWV result in
corresponding changes in the microbial response (46). As this
level of ﬂuid shear reﬂects the ﬂuid shear levels previously
described for the brush border of the intestine, the RWV has
been proposed as a model for investigating the effects of low
ﬂuid shear levels that are similar to those in the intestine (3, 26,
47, 49, 58).
The effects of the low-ﬂuid-shear culture environment of the
RWV on microbial responses have been most thoroughly doc-
umented for Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Specif-
ically, LSSMG culture enhanced the virulence of this organism
in a murine model of infection, increased its stress resistance
proﬁles, and induced global alterations in gene expression (48,
74). Moreover, it was found that the RNA chaperone protein,
Hfq, was a major regulator of the LSMMG-induced molecular
genetic response in S. Typhimurium (72). Hfq is a conserved
global regulator that facilitates the binding of small regulatory
RNAs with mRNAs to exert translational regulation in re-
sponse to environmental stress (72). Subsequent studies have
also identiﬁed a role for Hfq in regulating the LSMMG-in-
duced response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (14). Hfq and Hfq
homologues are highly conserved across prokaryotic and eu-
karyotic species and have been connected to the stress re-
sponse and virulence of many pathogens (68). In more recent
studies, Rosado et al. investigated the culture of methicillin-
susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) in the low-ﬂuid-shear environ-
ment of the RWV (62). No differences in growth proﬁles or
MICs of various antibiotics were observed between LSMMG
and control cultured S. aureus (62). However, those authors
did report decreases in carotenoid production, alterations in
red blood cell lysis, and the differential expression of two genes
involved in metabolism and transport (62).
A caveat for the study of pathogenic microorganisms is their
ability to survive and adjust their virulence characteristics in
response to rapidly changing, often extreme environmental
conditions, including low ﬂuid shear. However, there has been
little investigation into the responses of S. aureus to the envi-
ronmental conditions it encounters in vivo, where it rarely
causes disease, for example, in the nasal pharynx, skin surface,
and intestine. By investigating the mechanisms it utilizes to
repress virulence at these sites, we can increase our under-
standing of the environmental triggers that lead to the initia-
tion of virulence. The present studies were performed to
determine the effect of low-ﬂuid-shear culture on methicillin-
resistant S. aureus (MRSA) to elucidate impacts on cellular
responses, such as bioﬁlm formation, which has been postu-
lated for many microorganisms in the intestines, where low-
shear conditions exist (11, 24, 40). Furthermore, as multiple
Gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to use Hfq as
a common molecular response mechanism to low ﬂuid shear
(14, 72), we evaluated key regulators of the Gram-positive
organism S. aureus to determine the potential of a universally
conserved response(s) to this environmental parameter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains and growth conditions. Methicillin-resistant S. aureus N315
(kindly provided by Mark Shirtliff, University of Maryland Dental School) was
used for all studies. Methicillin-sensitive S. aureus 8325 (kindly provided by
Naomi Balaban, Tufts University) was used in experiments as indicated. Prior to
every experiment, S. aureus was taken from a frozen stock, inoculated into tryptic
FIG. 1. Operation of the RWV bioreactor (Synthecon, Houston, TX). (A) Image of the NASA-designed RWV apparatus used to create the
LSMMG environment for bacterial culture. (B) The altered positioning of the RWV that results in the two culture orientations, depicting the axis
of rotation. The LSMMG environment is achieved by rotation of the RWV on an axis parallel to the ground, whereas the axis of rotation in the
control orientation is perpendicular to the ground. (C) Depiction of the orbital path of a cell when cultured in the LSMMG orientation. The
continued combination of the sedimentation effect, whereby gravity and lack of motility cause a cell to settle to the bottom of the vessel, and
the clockwise solid body rotation of the medium results in the continuous suspension of the cell in an orbit.
VOL. 77, 2011
LOW-FLUID-SHEAR CULTURE OF S. AUREUS
6369

soy broth (TSB), and grown statically overnight. Aliquots of the culture were
diluted (1:200) in fresh TSB and loaded into 50-ml RCCS-1 RWV bioreactors
(Synthecon, Houston, TX) in both the LSMMG orientation (Fig. 1B) and control
orientations (Fig. 1B). Care was taken to ensure that no bubbles were present
within the reactors, which could prevent disruption of the low-shear condition.
The bioreactors were placed in a 37°C incubator and operated at 25 rpm for 20 h,
at which point stationary phase was achieved.
Growth proﬁles. S. aureus cultures were initiated in the RWV as described
above. Following 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 h of growth, a 1.5-ml aliquot was removed,
using a 3-ml luer lock syringe, from sampling ports on the face of the RWV. For
all time points greater than 10 h, the entire RWV culture volume was used for
enumerating samples by removing and vigorously vortexing the contents of the
vessels, to ensure dispersion of any aggregates that had formed during culture.
Homogeneous dispersion was conﬁrmed using light microscopy. For all time
points, samples were enumerated using serial dilution with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) and plated on tryptic soy agar (TSA) followed by overnight culture
at 37°C. Growth curves were determined using a minimum of three separate
cultures for each time point.
ESEM imaging. Following 20 h of growth in the RWV, cultures of S. aureus
N315 in the LSMMG orientation resulted in the presence of visible aggregates in
the ﬂuid phase of the vessel. The aggregates, as well as samples from the control
vessel, were carefully removed from only the ﬂuid phase of each vessel and ﬁxed
with 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1% formaldehyde for 30 min at room tempera-
ture. The samples were washed three times with ﬁlter-sterilized, deionized water
by gentle inversion and then loaded onto silicon wafer chips on T stubs. Samples
were then dried in the chamber of the electron microscope and imaged using a
Philips XL 30 environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM; FEI Co.,
Hillsboro, OR).
Antibiotic resistance assay. Antibiotic resistance assays were performed using
identical cultures of S. aureus N315 in four RWVs, two of which were operated
in the LSMMG orientation and two in the control orientation (Fig. 1B). After
20 h of culture, one vessel from the LSMMG and one from the control orien-
tation were used to determine the initial cell concentrations, deﬁned as 100%
survival, using direct plating as described above. The two remaining vessels were
carefully removed from their rotation base units to retain the aggregate struc-
ture, and 2.5 ml of the medium was replaced with 2.5 ml of ciproﬂoxacin to a ﬁnal
concentration of 25 g/ml, corresponding to 50 times the MIC. To ensure that
ﬂuid shear force was no longer a variable, the vessels were allowed to sit statically
at room temperature for 24 h, at which point the cell concentration was deter-
mined by serial dilution and plating as described above. Antibiotic resistance
levels were determined using three independent biological samples.
Carotenoid extraction. Quantitative comparisons of carotenoid levels between
LSMMG and control cultures of S. aureus N315 were achieved spectrophoto-
metrically as previously described by Marshall et al. (42). Brieﬂy, based on
growth curve estimates at 20 h, approximately 3.0  107 cells were removed from
both LSMMG and control cultures. Samples were pelleted by centrifugation at
10,000  g for 3 min, then washed three times with PBS and resuspended in 500
l of methanol, followed by a 5-min incubation in a 55°C water bath. The cells
were then pelleted again and the supernatants recovered. Staphylococcus aureus
8325, which has a naturally occurring mutation in a positive regulator of sigma
factor B, resulting in an unpigmented phenotype (33), was extracted as described
above and used to establish a baseline absorbance. The absorbance of the
resulting supernatant, containing the extracted carotenoid pigments, was re-
corded at 460 nm. The carotenoid extraction protocol was followed for samples
from three separate cultures.
Oxidative stress assay. The susceptibility to oxidative stress was determined
for both S. aureus N315 and 8325. After 20 h of culture, the contents of the
reactors were removed, placed into sterile containers, and vigorously vortexed
for 30 s to disband bioﬁlms. A concentrated stock solution of hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) was immediately added to approximately 30 ml of both LSMMG and
control cultures, as cell numbers evaluated were equalized based on growth
curves, bringing the overall H2O2 concentration to 30 mM. Viable microbial
concentrations were determined every 15 min using serial plate counts as de-
scribed above.
To determine the duration of the LSMMG effect, the oxidative stress assay was
repeated. S. aureus N315 was cultured for 20 h, at which point the RWV
bioreactors were stopped and the contents removed and immediately placed into
sterile containers, where they were allowed to sit statically. At various kinetic
time points the oxidative stress assay was performed on these samples. All
oxidative stress assays were performed in triplicate.
Whole-blood killing assay. All relevant blood assays were reviewed and ap-
proved by the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at the NASA
Johnson Space Center prior to implementation. After 20 h of culture, S. aureus
N315 cells from the LSMMG or control RWV were placed in sterile containers
and vigorously vortexed for 30 s to disband bioﬁlms. Cell concentrations were
adjusted to approximately 1  104 cells in 100 l of PBS. Blood was collected
from healthy human subjects in heparinized tubes to coincide with the 20-h
culture time point. A 900-l volume of blood was immediately added to the PBS
bacterial solution. The infected blood was placed in a 37°C incubator with
agitation for 4 h. Samples were removed at predetermined time points, and the
viable microbial concentration was determined by serial dilution as described
above. The whole-blood killing assay was performed with three technical repli-
cates and repeated in duplicate with blood from two separate subjects.
RNA isolation. Samples of LSMMG and control cultured S. aureus N315 were
immediately incubated with a 2:1 volume of RNAprotect (Qiagen, Valencia, CA)
at room temperature for 10 min with occasional mixing to allow for RNA
stabilization. Samples were centrifuged at 5,000  g for 5 min, resulting in pellets
that were stored at 70°C until RNA isolation was performed. The pellets were
resuspended in 350 l of RLT lysis buffer (Qiagen) containing 3.5 l of 2-mer-
captoethanol. The suspension was added to approximately 250 l of ice-cold
zirconia beads (Ambion, Austin, TX) in screw-cap tubes. Cells were lysed by
bead beating at maximum speed for 5 min using the Mini-Beadbeater 8 (Biospec
Products, Bartlesville, OK). The lysed cell suspension was added to QIAshredder
columns (Qiagen) and centrifuged at 10,000  g for 1 min. To the homogenized
lysate, 250 l of 200 proof ethanol was added; this mixture was applied to an
RNeasy minicolumn (Qiagen), and the standard protocol for the RNeasy minikit
(Qiagen) was followed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Contami-
nating genomic DNA was removed with Turbo DNA-free (Ambion). Denaturing
agarose gel electrophoresis was used to assess the quality of RNA by visualiza-
tion of intact 16S and 23S rRNA bands. RNA quantity was measured with a
NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA). Puriﬁed RNA was
stored at 70°C until use in downstream applications.
Microarray analysis. Gene expression proﬁling was achieved using the Af-
fymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) GeneChip S. aureus genome array containing probe
sets for over 3,300 open reading frames based on sequence information from
four S. aureus strains, including N315. Total RNA was isolated as described
above. The quality of the RNA was evaluated with a Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent
Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA). GeneChip processing was performed as
previously described by Dunman et al. (18). Brieﬂy, 25 g of total RNA was
reverse transcribed, and the resulting cDNA was labeled and fragmented to
produce oligonucleotide probes in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions (Affymetrix) for antisense prokaryotic arrays. The probes were then hy-
bridized to S. aureus-speciﬁc GeneChips using the GeneChip hybridization oven
640 (Affymetrix). The chips were then washed and stained using the GeneChip
ﬂuidics station 400 (Affymetrix). The chips were scanned and data analyzed using
an GeneArray scanner (Affymetrix). To accurately compare expression patterns,
each GeneChip was hybridized with LSMMG and control-cultured cDNA from
the same date of culture. Each experiment was performed in duplicate from
independent biological samples. Analysis of the data by GCOS (Affymetrix) and
analysis of variance, ﬁltered with a 2-fold cutoff limit and P value of 0.05, was
used to generate a list of genes that demonstrated differential expression proﬁles
in response to LSMMG culture.
Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. Total RNA was reverse transcribed
using the QuantiTect reverse transcription kit (Qiagen) and cDNA as per the
manufacturer’s instructions. Primers to these genes (Table 1) were designed and
TABLE 1. Primer pairs used in this study
Primer
N315 ORF
Sequence (533)
16SF
SArRNA01
ACCGTGAGGTCAAGCAAATC
16SR
SArRNA01
GTACAAGACCCGGGAACGTA
hfqF
SA1145
CGAAAACATCCAAGACAAAGC
hfqR
SA1145
AAGTGCTGATCGCATGTTTG
cspAF
SA1234
GGTTTAACGCTGAAAAAGGATTCG
cspAR
SA1234
TAACAACGTTTGCAGCTTGTGGAC
sigBF
SA1869
GAAATTGGGCCAAGAATCAA
sigBR
SA1869
TTTGTCCCATTTCCATTGCT
asp23F
SA1984
TCGCTGCACGTGAAGTTAAA
as23R
SA1984
CAGCAGCTTGTTTTTCACCA
uspF
SA1532
GCTTAAATGCCGTGGAAAGA
uspR
SA1532
GTGGTTGGAAGTCTGCTGGT
tdcFF
SA0455
AGATTACCGGAAGCACTTGG
tdcFR
SA0455
CAGCGCTTACGATATGTCCA
6370
CASTRO ET AL.
APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA) using their OligoPerfect designer.
Standard curves were generated for each primer pair using the QuantiFast
SYBR green PCR kit (Qiagen) and 7900HT Fast real-time PCR system (Applied
Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA) to verify primer efﬁciencies as well as the absence of
dimers and nonspeciﬁc products; this PCR product was also assessed for the
correct amplicon size via agarose gel electrophoresis. The QuantiFast SYBR
green PCR kit (Qiagen) and 7900HT Fast real-time PCR system (Applied
Biosystems) were again used to establish expression levels. Relative expression
values were determined by using the CT method via SDS 2.2.2 software by
means of relative quantiﬁcation using 16S rRNA as the endogenous reference
gene (Applied Biosystems). All quantitative PCR evaluations were repeated in
triplicate from three independent experiments.
Statistical analysis. Student’s t tests were used to determine signiﬁcance be-
tween control and LSMMG samples. A P value of 0.05 was considered statis-
tically signiﬁcant and is denoted by asterisks in the relevant ﬁgures.
Microarray data accession number. The microarray data were submitted to
the GenBank Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and can be found
under accession number GSE28077.
RESULTS
A low-ﬂuid-shear culture environment promotes S. aureus
attachment-independent bioﬁlm formation. Visual examina-
tion of the LSMMG and control cultures of N315 indicated
much greater levels of clumping in the LSMMG cultures.
ESEM imaging revealed the presence of a distinct extracellular
polymeric substance (EPS) completely encasing the bacterial
cells that was less visible on samples from the control vessel
(Fig. 2). The vast amount of EPS coating encasing the aggre-
gates of low-ﬂuid-shear-cultured staphylococcal cells is char-
acteristic of an S. aureus bioﬁlm.
Low-ﬂuid-shear-cultured S. aureus aggregates are more re-
sistant to antibiotic stress. To further investigate the bioﬁlm
phenotype, S. aureus aggregates that formed during low-ﬂuid-
shear culture were evaluated for changes in ciproﬂoxacin re-
sistance compared to control cultures. Ciproﬂoxacin was added
directly to statically resting control and LSMMG cultures fol-
lowing 20 h of culture in the RWV in order to not disrupt
low-ﬂuid-shear-induced aggregates. After 24 h of exposure to
ciproﬂoxacin, the S. aureus aggregates were 1.72-fold more
resistant than bacteria cultured in the control orientation to
the antibiotic (Fig. 3). The increased resistance of the aggre-
gates is in agreement with the characteristics of attached bac-
terial bioﬁlms (65).
Low-ﬂuid-shear culture conditions result in decreased
growth for S. aureus. Bioﬁlm conditions impact metabolism
and growth (65), and previous studies of Gram-negative or-
ganisms indicated alterations in generation time and overall
growth proﬁles (49); therefore, we examined the growth proﬁle
of S. aureus N315. As previous studies had reported that S.
FIG. 2. Environmental scanning electron microscopy images of control and LSMMG-cultured S. aureus N315. Control-cultured S. aureus at
2,500 (A) and 10,000 (C) magniﬁcation revealed individual cells that were clearly visible. For low-ﬂuid-shear-cultured S. aureus, at 2,500
(B) and 10,000 (D), the cells were much less visible and completely embedded in an EPS matrix.
VOL. 77, 2011
LOW-FLUID-SHEAR CULTURE OF S. AUREUS
6371

aureus does not exhibit altered growth proﬁles in the RWV
bioreactor (62), the growth proﬁle of an additional strain, S.
aureus 8325, was evaluated as a control to determine if any
observed changes suggested a strain-speciﬁc effect. To ensure
a homogeneous distribution during measurements of cell
counts, the entire contents of the vessels were removed and
vigorously vortexed for all time points greater than 10 h. For
both S. aureus strains, N315 and 8325, the LSMMG cultured
bacteria did not reach the same concentrations as the control
cultures. After 20 h of growth, cell concentrations of control
cultures of S. aureus N315 were 2.9-fold higher than cultures
grown in the LSMMG orientation (1.86  107  2.6  106
CFU/ml versus 6.27  106  1.32  106 CFU/ml [means 
standard deviations]) (Fig. 4). In a similar fashion, after 20 h of
growth, CFU in control cultures of S. aureus 8325 were also
signiﬁcantly higher than in cultures grown in the LSMMG
orientation, 5.6  107  7.12  106 CFU/ml versus 1.0  107 
2.00  105 CFU/ml, respectively, indicating a 5.6-fold differ-
ence (data not shown).
Low-ﬂuid-shear culture reduces carotenoid production in S.
aureus N315. To investigate the characteristics of the individual
S. aureus cells within these bioﬁlms, LSMMG-cultured S. au-
reus cells were further characterized after bioﬁlm dispersal. S.
aureus N315 develops its characteristic golden yellow color due
to the primary carotenoid pigment staphyloxanthin during the
stationary phase of growth. It was visibly apparent that the
LSMMG-cultured S. aureus N315 was less pigmented than
respective control cultures. To quantify this effect on carote-
noid production, carotenoid levels were measured after 20 h of
growth in LSMMG and control orientations. Visual color dif-
ferences between cultures grown in LSMMG and control ori-
entations (Fig. 5A) were conﬁrmed by methanol extraction and
measurement of absorbance at 460 nm as previously described
by Marshall et al. (42). Absorbance of the LSMMG-cultured S.
aureus was signiﬁcantly lower than that of control cultures (P 
0.0001) (Fig. 5B), although not as low as unpigmented S. au-
reus 8325, suggesting LSMMG-cultured S. aureus may produce
an early intermediate of staphyloxanthin.
A low-ﬂuid-shear environment enhances S. aureus N315 sus-
ceptibility to oxidative stress and is a transient effect. As
carotenoids are known to have protective antioxidant proper-
ties (35), cultures of S. aureus N315 were evaluated for oxida-
tive stress survival. As S. aureus 8325 does not produce caro-
tenoids, the low-ﬂuid-shear condition does not alter its
pigmentation and was therefore also evaluated for susceptibil-
ity to oxidative stress. After the entire contents of the vessels
were removed and vigorously vortexed, they were exposed to
30 mM hydrogen peroxide for 60 min. S. aureus N315 cultured
in the LSMMG position demonstrated over 4-fold greater sen-
sitivity to the peroxide than cultures in the control orientation
FIG. 3. Levels of antibiotic resistance for control and low-ﬂuid-
shear-cultured S. aureus N315. Low-shear-induced S. aureus aggre-
gates were 1.72-fold more resistant to ciproﬂoxacin than bacteria cul-
tured in the control-oriented RWV (, P  0.05).
FIG. 4. Comparative growth curves of S. aureus N315 when cul-
tured in either the LSMMG or control orientation. Culture in the
LSMMG environment resulted in a 2.9-fold decrease in cell concen-
trations compared to control cultures.
FIG. 5. Decreased carotenoid production of S. aureus N315 in re-
sponse to LSMMG culture. (A) Centrifugation of the control and
LSMMG cultures resulted in a visual difference in the pigmentation of
the pellets. (B) To quantitate the differences in carotenoid production,
the carotenoids were extracted and measured spectrometrically at 460
nm. There was a signiﬁcant reduction in absorbance of the LSMMG-
cultured bacteria compared to the control (, P  0.0001). S. aureus
8325, which does not produce carotenoids, was used as a negative
control for comparison.
6372
CASTRO ET AL.
APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

(Fig. 6). As expected, the unpigmented S. aureus 8325 cultures
did not display any differences between LSMMG and control
orientations (data not shown), suggesting that the increased
susceptibility to oxidation may be associated with the de-
creased production of carotenoids.
To determine the duration of the LSMMG effect of in-
creased sensitivity to oxidative stress, LSMMG and control
cultures were removed from the RWVs after 20 h, vortexed,
and placed into sterile containers, where they remained static.
Every 30 min, samples from the S. aureus N315 cultures were
subjected to the oxidative stress assay described above. When
the difference in survival failed to show statistical signiﬁcance,
we determined that the LSMMG effect had dissipated (Fig. 6).
Based upon our observations from this assay, the LSMMG
effect on S. aureus is transient, lasting less than 1.5 h once
removed from the low-ﬂuid-shear environment.
Low-ﬂuid-shear culture conditions enhance the susceptibil-
ity of S. aureus N315 to human whole blood. As increased
oxidative stress susceptibility could indicate a decreased sur-
vival of bacteria versus innate immune cells, we investigated
the survival of LSMMG-cultured S. aureus against immune
components present in whole blood. To accomplish this, hu-
man subjects were scheduled for blood draws at precisely 20 h
postinoculation of the RWVs with S. aureus. The whole blood
was immediately returned to the lab for challenge with either
the LSMMG- or control-cultured bacteria. After incubation in
whole blood for 4 h, S. aureus cultured in the LSMMG orien-
tation was signiﬁcantly more susceptible to killing than controls
(Fig. 7). Interestingly, the difference in percent survival be-
tween control and low-shear cultures in our two samples from
different subjects was approximately 30%, revealing a consis-
tent trend in the susceptibility of low-shear-cultured S. aureus
(Fig. 7).
Differential gene expression in S. aureus N315 imparted by
low-ﬂuid-shear conditions. As S. aureus has demonstrated sig-
niﬁcant phenotypic differences in response to a low-shear en-
vironment, we evaluated the gene expression patterns of
LSMMG-cultured S. aureus N315 compared to control cul-
tures. N315 has been fully sequenced, facilitating identiﬁcation
of molecular mechanisms and conserved responses to the
LSMMG environment.
Using S. aureus whole-genome GeneChips, we were able to
identify 17 genes whose expression was upregulated in the
LSMMG environment; decreased expression values could not
be correlated to any gene or open reading frame (ORF). Table
2 lists the upregulated genes as well as their associated protein
products, functions, ORF identiﬁcation numbers from the se-
quencing of N315 (34), and consensus sequences in their pre-
dicted regulatory regions. The majority of these genes are
involved in metabolic processes, speciﬁcally, carbohydrate,
pyruvate, and arginine metabolism, or responding to environ-
mental stressors. Genes that displayed increased expression
in response to the LSMMG environment were dispersed
throughout the staphylococcal chromosome, with three in-
stances where the genes belonged to the same operon. Align-
ment of the LSMMG-responsive genes revealed the conserved
motif t/aTGTGA t/a6TCACAt/a (with the most common nu-
cleotides in lowercase and portions of the sequence represent-
ing regulatory binding sites underlined) in the regulatory re-
gions of pﬂA and pﬂB, encoding formate acetyltransferase and
formate acetyltransferase activating enzyme (SA0218 and
SA0219); adh1, encoding alcohol dehydrogenase (SA0562);
ddh, encoding D-lactate dehydrogenase (SA2312); and a hypo-
thetical protein (SA2268). This consensus sequence is a bind-
ing site for the Rex repressor (51). Additionally, the sigma
factor B (SigB) promoter consensus sequence, GTTTa/ta/
t12-15GGGa/tAa/t (22), was located in regulatory regions of the
operon containing alkaline shock protein 23 (SA1984 to
SA1986), and ORFs of an ATP-dependent protease, clpL
(SA2336); myosin-cross-reactive streptococcal antigen homo-
FIG. 6. LSMMG-cultured S. aureus N315 is more susceptible to
killing by oxidative stress. After 60 min (time zero), 50% of the
LSMMG-cultured S. aureus had succumbed to the damage by H2O2,
whereas the control cultures did not fall below 90% (, P  0.05). To
test the duration of the LSMMG effect, samples of both the LSMMG
and control bacteria were allowed to sit statically, out of the vessels, for
a period of time (1, 1.5, and 2 h) and then subjected to H2O2. At 1.5 h
there failed to be a signiﬁcant (, P  0.05) difference in the survival
rates of the LSMMG- and control-cultured bacteria after 60 min, and
it was determined that the LSMMG effect had diminished.
FIG. 7. Comparison of survival ability of LSMMG- and control-
cultured S. aureus N315 when challenged with the immune compo-
nents present in human whole blood. After 4 h, the LSMMG-cultured
S. aureus displayed a signiﬁcantly reduced ability to survive in whole
blood compared to control cultures (, P  0.05).
VOL. 77, 2011
LOW-FLUID-SHEAR CULTURE OF S. AUREUS
6373

logue (SA0102); a probable TdcF protein (SA0455); and hy-
pothetical protein (SA0752).
As regulatory proteins are either directly implicated by the
microarray data in the LSMMG response of S. aureus or have
been in Gram-negative bacteria, primers were designed to
evaluate the expression of these possible regulators to low-
ﬂuid-shear culture. The alternative sigma factor, SigB, is a
regulator of the general stress response of S. aureus (33), and
the Rex repressor protein regulates the transcription of genes
involved in maintaining the intracellular NADH/NAD redox
balance (51). Furthermore, the major cold shock protein,
CspA, is a molecular chaperone and is also involved in the
regulation of staphyloxanthin production (29), and the trans-
lational regulator Hfq is highly involved in the stress responses
of many Gram-negative organisms and has been directly con-
nected to the regulation of the LSMMG response in S. Typhi-
murium and P. aeruginosa (14, 72).
Despite the presence of multiple conserved SigB and Rex
binding sites in the regulatory regions of LSMMG-induced
genes, we were unable to detect any signiﬁcant differences in
their expression under LSMMG conditions. Additionally, we
were unable to detect any differences in the expression of cspA
in response to the LSMMG culture environment. However, the
expression of hfq was downregulated 2.68-fold in response to
low-ﬂuid-shear conditions.
DISCUSSION
Within the large intestine exists a vast range of microenvi-
ronments attributable to luminal ﬂow rates, variations in the
mucus layer, interactions with epithelial surfaces, and contin-
ually changing levels of nutrients, which microorganisms must
be able to withstand (40). Material ﬂowing through the intes-
tinal lumen is the source of high levels of shear that bacterial
cells must ﬁrst endure prior to colonization (66). Once out of
the direct ﬂow in the lumen, successful colonizers assemble
near the intestinal walls, where they encounter intestinal epi-
thelial cells and decreased levels of ﬂuid shear (24). It is at this
point that the microorganism can persist and colonize or could
penetrate the mucus layer and actively invade the intestinal
epithelium.
The persisting bacteria that ﬁnd beneﬁt in colonization of a
host also ﬁnd beneﬁt in forming bioﬁlms (67). The ability to
form a bioﬁlm imparts evolutionary advantages to bacteria,
such as persistence in a favorable environment, protection
from environmental stressors, antibiotics, and host immunity,
communal metabolism, and an increased probability of trans-
duction and transformation (27, 65). Microbial bioﬁlms asso-
ciated with the mucus that lines the human gastrointestinal
tract have been proposed and conﬁrmed by multiple investi-
gators (11, 39, 52) and are gaining further interest for their role
in human digestion and disease. As S. aureus is associated with
intestinal colonization (1, 8, 16, 28, 61), adheres to intestinal
mucus (70), and is an efﬁcient bioﬁlm former, there is great
potential that it exhibits a bioﬁlm phenotype while colonizing
this site. Additionally, previous research has demonstrated the
importance of the cecal mucus layer, within the intestinal tract
of the mouse, in providing a key niche facilitating intestinal
colonization by S. aureus (23). Furthermore, the intestinal tract
is considered a key location where S. aureus acquires antibiotic
resistance genes (59, 64), and intestinal colonization further
increases the spread and carriage of S. aureus via a fecal-
TABLE 2. Identiﬁcation of genes whose expression is upregulated in response to low-ﬂuid-shear culture, their corresponding predicted
regulatory consensus sequences, and their associations with Hfq
N315
ORF
Gene
name
Fold
change
Protein product
Upregulated in an
hfq mutanta,b
Binds
Hfqb,c
Predicted regulatory consensus sequenced
Position from
start codone
SA1986
2.71
Hypothetical protein
x
x
GTTTAAGAAAAAAACTGATGGGTAC
92
SA1985
2.65
Hypothetical protein
x
x
GTTTAAGAAAAAAACTGATGGGTAC
ORF 2c
SA1984
asp23
2.26
Alkaline shock protein
x
x
GTTTAAGAAAAAAACTGATGGGTAC
ORF 3c
SA0218
pﬂB
4.19
Formate acetyltransferase
ATGTGAAAAAAATCACAA
96
SA0219
pﬂA
3.84
Formate acetyltransferase
activating enzyme
x
ATGTGAAAAAAATCACAA
ORF 2c
SA1012
argF
2.35
Ornithine carbamoyltransferase
SA1013
arcC
2.43
Carbamate kinase
SA1532
usp
3.19
Probable universal stress protein
SA0455
2.17
Probable TdcF protein
x
x
GTTTAAAGCCCATGTAAAAGGGGTAT
179
SA2336
clpL
2.81
ATP-dependent Clp proteinase
chain ClpL
x
x
GTTTTATCACCTATTATTAGTGGAAA
115
SA2312
ddh
2.31
D-Lactate dehydrogenase
TTGTGATATTTTTCACAA
39
SA0562
adh1
2.27
Alcohol dehydrogenase
x
TTGTGAATTAATTCACAT
306
SA2410
nrdD
2.09
Anaerobic ribonucleoside
triphosphate reductase
x
SA0102
2.14
Myosin-cross-reactive antigen
ATTTACAATTCACAAAGGGGTAT
61
SA0570
2.14
Hypothetical protein
x
x
SA0752
2.07
Hypothetical protein
x
GTTTAAAAGATAATGTGACGGGGTAA
67
SA2268
4.45
Hypothetical protein
TTGTGAAATACATCACAA
129
a Data were obtained from a previously published study (Liu et al. 	36
).
b Genes whose expression was upregulated in response to mutation of the hfq gene in S. aureus (Liu et al. 	36
).
c mRNAs of genes that bind Hfq as determined by immunoprecipitation (Liu et al. 	36
).
d Predicted regulatory consensus sequences determined by alignment of the 500 bases upstream of LSMMG-responsive open reading frames. Sequences that are
boldfaced and underlined correspond to regulatory binding sites for different regions.
e The position of the ﬁrst base of the predicted regulatory sequence in relation to the start codon at 1. This is the open reading frame position in the operon with
a predicted regulatory consensus sequence.
6374
CASTRO ET AL.
APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

environmental route (8, 12), potentially allowing further ge-
netic diversity.
S. aureus has long been considered a member of the intes-
tinal ﬂora (15, 61) but has received little investigative attention
as to its potential role as an infectious agent of gastroenteritis,
as opposed to its known role as a cause of toxigenic gastroen-
teristis, wherein ingestion of preformed staphylococcal entero-
toxins in contaminated food, and not the presence of the or-
ganism in the gut, is known to cause disease (17). Moreover,
the difﬁculties encountered with analyzing gastrointestine-
dwelling microbial communities in situ in healthy individuals,
along with the instability of these bioﬁlm structures (11), have
resulted in little research concerning the formation of S. aureus
bioﬁlms in the intestine and their potential role in normal
tissue function or transition to disease. Despite this, there is
much to be gained from studying the structure and function of
S. aureus bioﬁlms in the gastrointestinal tract, including ex-
panding our understanding of the mechanisms regulating vir-
ulence, as well as potentially targeting critical components
necessary for bioﬁlm formation, as has been previously pro-
posed for staphylococcal vaccine development (25).
The low levels of ﬂuid shear created by the RWV are phys-
iologically relevant to the brush border of the intestines (49)
and trigger S. aureus attachment-independent bioﬁlms, dem-
onstrated by copious amounts of EPS completely encasing
LSMMG-cultured bacterial cells and a corresponding increase
in antibiotic resistance. Alterations of bacterial bioﬁlm char-
acteristics in response to the low ﬂuid shear in the LSMMG
environment have been previously demonstrated. Culture in
the RWV resulted in self-aggregation and increased alginate
production of P. aeruginosa and conferred a phenotype consis-
tent with reported cystic ﬁbrosis pathology in the lung (13).
Additionally, Escherichia coli attached to glass microcarrier
beads generated thicker and more resistant bioﬁlms when cul-
tivated under LSMMG conditions (38). Taken together, a low-
ﬂuid-shear environment stimulates increased EPS production
by multiple microorganisms. If the enhanced mucoidy pro-
duced by S. aureus N315 at low ﬂuid shear levels reﬂects a
response comparable to the response during colonization of
low ﬂuid shear niches in the intestinal tract, then the RWV
system may provide a model of intestinal, mucus-associated
bioﬁlms.
Matrix-enclosed bacterial cells in an attached bioﬁlm expe-
rience different environmental conditions than if growing
planktonically (60). The environment within an extracellular
matrix has been characterized as having low oxygen tension
and limited nutrient availability, resulting in altered microbial
metabolism (45). Using microarray analysis, we were able to
identify increased expression proﬁles correlating to 17 ORFs.
Biochemically, the protein products of many of these genes can
be connected to a fermentative metabolism, as formate acetyl-
transferase, D-lactate dehydrogenase, and alcohol dehydroge-
nase were upregulated in response to low-ﬂuid-shear culture.
The alignment of the predicted regulatory regions of LSMMG-
responsive genes revealed two conserved consensus sequences:
t/aTGTGA t/a6TCACAt/a and GTTTa/ta/t12–15GGGa/tAa/t.
The ﬁrst sequence is a binding site for the redox-sensing tran-
scriptional repressor Rex (51). The Rex repressor is a sensor of
the intracellular NADH/NAD redox balance, and it is con-
sidered a key regulator of anaerobic metabolism in S. aureus.
The binding of Rex to NADH leads to the derepression of
genes whose protein products are involved in fermentative
respiration, which regenerates the NAD pool (51). The in-
creased expression of genes under the control of Rex is con-
sistent with the conditions associated within a bioﬁlm. The
second consensus sequence is a binding site for the alternate
sigma factor SigB (22). SigB is a global regulator involved in
the differential regulation of over 200 staphylococcal genes
upon entrance into stationary phase and in response to various
environmental stressors (9). Therefore, it is not surprising that
genes under its control were upregulated. The role of SigB in
bioﬁlm formation, however, remains under debate (57, 69).
Furthermore, 8 of the 17 LSMMG-responsive ORFs have been
reported to be upregulated in bioﬁlm cultures of S. aureus
compared to planktonic culture (60). Taken together, the data
from the microarray analysis support the phenotypic data that
the LSMMG cultures respond to the low-shear environment by
initiating a bioﬁlm phenotype.
Interestingly, our microarray results indicated upregulation
of the gene encoding the ATP-dependent protease ClpL. This
is notable, as Rosado et al. documented the increase of this
gene in response to LSMMG culture as well (62). Further-
more, Clp proteases have been implicated in the LSMMG
response of Streptococcus pneumoniae, E. coli, and P. aerugi-
nosa (2, 14, 37, 71). The functional role of ClpL in S. aureus is
unknown, as is the role of this family of proteases in response
to the LSMMG environment, but it warrants further investi-
gation.
For their role as potential regulators of the LSMMG re-
sponse, the expression levels of rex, sigB, cspA, and hfq were
investigated. As previously described, Rex and Sig B are both
transcriptional regulators whose consensus binding sites were
noted in the regulatory region of multiple LSMMG-induced
ORFs. CspA, the major cold shock protein in S. aureus, also
functions as an RNA chaperone and has been implicated in
pigment production (29). The RNA chaperone Hfq has been
directly associated with the mechanism governing the LSMMG
response in both S. Typhimurium and P. aeruginosa (14, 72).
Despite the increase in expression of genes under the control
of Rex and SigB, no signiﬁcant difference in their expression
levels in response to LSMMG was found. This was true for
CspA as well. However, a 2.68-fold decrease in the expression
of Hfq was observed. The role of Hfq in S. aureus is currently
the subject of much debate (10, 36); however, Liu et al.,
through the construction of an hfq mutant, showed that Hfq
can function as a global regulator in S. aureus (36). Comparing
our results with the work by Liu et al. revealed that 7 of our 17
LSMMG-upregulated genes were also upregulated in response
to an hfq mutation (Table 2) (36). Furthermore, 9 of our 17
LSMMG-upregulated genes were reported by Liu et al. to bind
Hfq (36). Interestingly, the work by Liu et al. indicated that
mutation of hfq affected pigment production and resulted in an
overall decrease in virulence, which strongly correlates with
our work, further suggesting that Hfq is involved in the low-
shear response of S. aureus. As the RNA isolation technique
was not optimal for the recovery of small RNAs and as the
arrays used did not contain probes to the coding sequences of
such genes, it is possible that Hfq, along with other RNA
chaperones and/or small noncoding RNAs, govern the LSSMG
response via classical regulators, such as Rex and SigB. More
VOL. 77, 2011
LOW-FLUID-SHEAR CULTURE OF S. AUREUS
6375

importantly, this is the ﬁrst report identifying an Hfq response
to low-ﬂuid-shear conditions in a Gram-positive microorgan-
ism. This association in S. aureus, in addition to previously
reported responses of Gram-negative organisms, strongly sug-
gests that the ability to sense and respond to mechanical stim-
uli is evolutionarily conserved among structurally diverse pro-
karyotes.
Growth of S. aureus N315 under low-ﬂuid-shear conditions
resulted in decreased levels of the pigmented carotenoid
staphyloxanthin, a nonessential, secondary metabolite (56).
Staphyloxanthin is produced through the mevalonate biosyn-
thetic pathway, which requires acetyl coenzyme A (CoA) (6).
The observed phenotype of a decrease in staphyloxanthin pro-
duction supports our microarray data, which suggest a fermen-
tative metabolism where pyruvate is shunted to support
fermentative respiration and less acetyl-CoA enters the meval-
onate pathway. It also follows that any available acetyl-CoA
would be preferentially utilized for the synthesis of vital iso-
prenoids.
For the microorganisms thus far examined, the effect of the
LSMMG environment on growth kinetics is varied, including
reports of the low-shear condition having no effect or resulting
in higher concentrations of bacteria than in controls (3, 5, 49,
62, 73). When cultured under LSMMG conditions in a nutri-
ent-rich broth, S. Typhimurium 3339 displayed nearly identi-
cal growth proﬁles to those of the control through the mid-log
growth phase (49). However, when cultured in a minimal salts
medium, a marked increase in concentrations of the LSMMG-
cultured bacteria compared to the control was noted (73). E.
coli ATCC 26 has demonstrated an opposite effect, growing
to higher concentrations in a nutrient-rich medium under
LSMMG conditions yet revealing no difference in growth pro-
ﬁles when cultured in a minimal medium (5). As staphylococci
have complex nutritional requirements, Rosado et al. used a
nutrient-rich growth medium and reported no signiﬁcant dif-
ference in growth between LSMMG and control cultures of
three methicillin-susceptible S. aureus clinical isolates, RF1,
RF6, and RF11 (62). However, when using a nutrient-rich
medium in our studies, we noted an approximately 3-fold dif-
ference in the cell concentrations of MRSA strain N315 and a
difference of more than 5-fold for the MSSA strain 8325. Ad-
ditionally, in response to LSMMG culturing in minimal me-
dium, E. coli ZK650 exhibited increased growth (19), whereas
under the same conditions, E. coli strains AIEC 083:H1 and
K-12 AMS6 displayed growth proﬁles similar to those of con-
trols (3, 71). Taken together, it is most likely that changes in
growth kinetics in response to LSMMG culture conditions
occur on a strain-speciﬁc basis. Moreover, this study is the ﬁrst
to report a decrease in total cell concentration over time in
response to culturing in the LSMMG environment. While the
cause of this decreased growth is unclear, it may result from
the heavy mucoidy and bioﬁlm characteristics previously de-
scribed.
Although similarities exist between the low-ﬂuid-shear re-
sponses of S. aureus and previously documented Gram-nega-
tive organisms, there appears to be a basic fundamental dif-
ference in virulence properties. Whereas S. Typhimurium, P.
aeruginosa, and pathogenic E. coli have all shown increased
virulence and/or virulence characteristics when cultured in
LSMMG (3, 14, 48), S. aureus appears to favor a phenotype
consistent with colonization rather than initiation of infection.
This difference is exempliﬁed by the decrease in carotenoid
production in S. aureus N315. Staphyloxanthin functions as a
protective coat that shields the bacterium from the deleterious
effects of reactive oxygen species associated with the human
immune system (35). In our studies, the low-ﬂuid-shear-cul-
tured, unpigmented bacteria were signiﬁcantly more suscepti-
ble to killing by both oxidative stress and the immune compo-
nents
present
in
human
whole
blood
than
respective
pigmented control cultures. S. Typhimurium and invasive
pathogenic E. coli, both enteric pathogens, are among the most
signiﬁcant causes of bacterial gastroenteritis (43), due, in part,
to their ability to traverse the mucus layer and consequently
interact with the underlying intestinal epithelium. Addition-
ally, both have the potential to actively invade intestinal epi-
thelial cells, affording themselves a protective environment in
which to replicate (20, 21). As S. aureus does not beneﬁt from
invasion of intestinal epithelial cells, it follows that S. aureus
may well colonize the low-ﬂuid-shear environment in the mu-
cosa near the surface of epithelial cells, establishing a bioﬁlm
phenotype.
While some of the responses of S. aureus parallel those from
the most thoroughly documented Gram-negative organisms to
low ﬂuid shear, such as the involvement of Hfq, the microbial
response appears to differ based upon the beneﬁt toward each
individual microorganism’s ability to proliferate. Contrary to
previous reports of the response of enhanced virulence char-
acteristics in several Gram-negative organisms, S. aureus
initiates a bioﬁlm/colonization phenotype that alters its
metabolism, slows its growth, and downregulates virulence
characteristics. This response could potentially beneﬁt S. au-
reus within the gastrointestinal tract and possibly other muco-
sal host sites, where it would experience low levels of ﬂuid
shear. Further analysis of this low-shear response in S. aureus
holds the potential to provide critical insight into key environ-
mental factors inﬂuencing the divergence between infection
and colonization during the initial host-pathogen interaction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NASA Human Research Program stu-
dent grant NNX07AM16G.
We thank Mark E. Shirtliff (University of Maryland Dental
School, Baltimore, MD) and Naomi Balaban (Tufts University,
North Grafton, MA) for kindly providing the strains. We thank
Jennifer Barrila and Aure´lie Crabbe´ (Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ) for scientiﬁc discussions on microbial responses to
LSMMG. We also thank William T. Wallace (Wyle Integrated Sci-
ence and Engineering, Houston, TX) for editing assistance and
Mariah Curran (Universities Space Research Association, Houston,
TX) for assistance with antibiotic assays.
REFERENCES
1. Acton, D. S., M. J. Plat-Sinnige, W. van Wamel, N. de Groot, and A. van
Belkum. 2009. Intestinal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus: how does its
frequency compare with that of nasal carriage and what is its clinical impact?
Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 28:115–127.
2. Allen, C. A., et al. 2006. Transcription proﬁles of Streptococcus pneumoniae
grown under different conditions of normal gravitation. Acta Astronaut.
60:433–444.
3. Allen, C. A., D. W. Niesel, and A. G. Torres. 2008. The effects of low-shear
stress on adherent-invasive Escherichia coli. Environ. Microbiol. 10:1512–
1525.
4. Avvisato, C. L., et al. 2007. Mechanical force modulates global gene expres-
sion and beta-catenin signaling in colon cancer cells. J. Cell Sci. 120:2672–
2682.
6376
CASTRO ET AL.
APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

5. Baker, P. W., M. L. Meyer, and L. G. Leff. 2004. Escherichia coli growth
under modeled reduced gravity. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 15:39–44.
6. Balibar, C. J., X. Shen, and J. Tao. 2009. The mevalonate pathway of
Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 191:851–861.
7. Baltz, J. M., P. O. Williams, and R. A. Cone. 1990. Dense ﬁbers protect
mammalian sperm against damage. Biol. Reprod. 43:485–491.
8. Bhalla, A., D. C. Aron, and C. J. Donskey. 2007. Staphylococcus aureus
intestinal colonization is associated with increased frequency of S. aureus on
skin of hospitalized patients. BMC Infect. Dis. 7:105.
9. Bischoff, M., et al. 2004. Microarray-based analysis of the Staphylococcus
aureus B regulon. J. Bacteriol. 186:4085–4099.
10. Bohn, C., C. Rigoulay, and P. Bouloc. 2007. No detectable effect of RNA-
binding protein Hfq absence in Staphylococcus aureus. BMC Microbiol.
7:10.
11. Bollinger, R. R., A. S. Barbas, E. L. Bush, S. S. Lin, and W. Parker. 2007.
Bioﬁlms in the normal human large bowel: fact rather than ﬁction. Gut
56:1481–1482.
12. Boyce, J. M., N. L. Havill, and B. Maria. 2005. Frequency and possible
infection control implications of gastrointestinal colonization with methicil-
lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J. Clin. Microbiol. 43:5992–5995.
13. Crabbe, A., et al. 2008. Use of the rotating wall vessel technology to study the
effect of shear stress on growth behaviour of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA01.
Environ. Microbiol. 10:2098–2110.
14. Crabbe, A., et al. 2010. Response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 to low
shear modelled microgravity involves AlgU regulation. Environ. Microbiol.
12:1545–1564.
15. Crossley, K., and J. Solliday. 1980. Comparison of rectal swabs and stool
cultures for the detection of gastrointestinal carriage of Staphylococcus au-
reus. J. Clin. Microbiol. 11:433–434.
16. Dearing, W. H., and G. M. Needham. 1960. Hospitalized patients with Staph-
ylococcus aureus in the intestine. JAMA 174:1597–1602.
17. Dinges, M. M., P. M. Orwin, and P. M. Schlievert. 2000. Exotoxins of
Staphylococcus aureus. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 13:16–34.
18. Dunman, P. M., et al. 2001. Transcription proﬁling-based identiﬁcation of
Staphylococcus aureus genes regulated by the agr and/or sarA loci. J. Bacte-
riol. 183:7341–7353.
19. Fang, A., D. L. Pierson, D. W. Koenig, S. K. Mishra, and A. L. Demain. 1997.
Effect of simulated microgravity and shear stress on microcin B17 production
by Escherichia coli and on its excretion into the medium. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 63:4090–4092.
20. Formal, S. B., T. L. Hale, and P. J. Sansonetti. 1983. Invasive enteric
pathogens. Rev. Infect. Dis. 5(Suppl. 4):S702–S707.
21. Formal, S. B., and R. B. Hornick. 1978. Invasive Escherichia coli. J. Infect.
Dis. 137:641–644.
22. Gertz, S., et al. 2000. Characterization of the B regulon in Staphylococcus
aureus. J. Bacteriol. 182:6983–6991.
23. Gries, D. M., N. J. Pultz, and C. J. Donskey. 2005. Growth in cecal mucus
facilitates colonization of the mouse intestinal tract by methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. J. Infect. Dis. 192:1621–1627.
24. Guo, P., A. M. Weinstein, and S. Weinbaum. 2000. A hydrodynamic mecha-
nosensory hypothesis for brush border microvilli. Am. J. Physiol. Renal
Physiol. 279:F698–F712.
25. Harro, J. M., et al. 2010. Vaccine development in Staphylococcus aureus:
taking the bioﬁlm phenotype into consideration. FEMS Immunol. Med.
Microbiol. 59:306–323.
26. Honer zu Bentrup, K., et al. 2006. Three-dimensional organotypic models of
human colonic epithelium to study the early stages of enteric salmonellosis.
Microbes Infect. 8:1813–1825.
27. Jefferson, K. K. 2004. What drives bacteria to produce a bioﬁlm? FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 236:163–173.
28. Jin, L. Q., et al. 2005. Detection and identiﬁcation of intestinal pathogenic
bacteria by hybridization to oligonucleotide microarrays. World J. Gastro-
enterol. 11:7615–7619.
29. Katzif, S., E. H. Lee, A. B. Law, Y. L. Tzeng, and W. M. Shafer. 2005. CspA
regulates pigment production in Staphylococcus aureus through a SigB-de-
pendent mechanism. J. Bacteriol. 187:8181–8184.
30. Kluytmans, J., A. van Belkum, and H. Verbrugh. 1997. Nasal carriage of
Staphylococcus aureus: epidemiology, underlying mechanisms, and associ-
ated risks. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 10:505–520.
31. Kostenko, V., M. M. Salek, P. Sattari, and R. J. Martinuzzi. 2010. Staphy-
lococcus aureus bioﬁlm formation and tolerance to antibiotics in response to
oscillatory shear stresses of physiological levels. FEMS Immunol. Med. Mi-
crobiol. 59:421–431.
32. Kuehnert, M. J., et al. 2005. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
hospitalizations, United States. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 11:868–872.
33. Kullik, I., P. Giachino, and T. Fuchs. 1998. Deletion of the alternative sigma
factor B in Staphylococcus aureus reveals its function as a global regulator
of virulence genes. J. Bacteriol. 180:4814–4820.
34. Kuroda, M., et al. 2001. Whole genome sequencing of meticillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus. Lancet 357:1225–1240.
35. Liu, G. Y., et al. 2005. Staphylococcus aureus golden pigment impairs neu-
trophil killing and promotes virulence through its antioxidant activity. J. Exp.
Med. 202:209–215.
36. Liu, Y., et al. 2010. Hfq is a global regulator that controls the pathogenicity
of Staphylococcus aureus. PLoS One 5:e13069.
37. Lynch, S. V., E. L. Brodie, and A. Matin. 2004. Role and regulation of sigma
S in general resistance conferred by low-shear simulated microgravity in
Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 186:8207–8212.
38. Lynch, S. V., K. Mukundakrishnan, M. R. Benoit, P. S. Ayyaswamy, and A.
Matin. 2006. Escherichia coli bioﬁlms formed under low-shear modeled
microgravity in a ground-based system. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72:7701–
7710.
39. Macfarlane, S. 2008. Microbial bioﬁlm communities in the gastrointestinal
tract. J. Clin. Gastroenterol. 42(Suppl. 3):S142–S143.
40. Macfarlane, S., and J. F. Dillon. 2007. Microbial bioﬁlms in the human
gastrointestinal tract. J. Appl. Microbiol. 102:1187–1196.
41. Malek, A. M., S. L. Alper, and S. Izumo. 1999. Hemodynamic shear stress
and its role in atherosclerosis. JAMA 282:2035–2042.
42. Marshall, J. H., and G. J. Wilmoth. 1981. Pigments of Staphylococcus aureus,
a series of triterpenoid carotenoids. J. Bacteriol. 147:900–913.
43. Mead, P. S., et al. 1999. Food-related illness and death in the United States.
Emerg. Infect. Dis. 5:607–625.
44. Mohamed, N., T. R. Rainier, Jr., and J. M. Ross. 2000. Novel experimental
study of receptor-mediated bacterial adhesion under the inﬂuence of ﬂuid
shear. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 68:628–636.
45. Nadell, C. D., J. B. Xavier, and K. R. Foster. 2009. The sociobiology of
bioﬁlms. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 33:206–224.
46. Nauman, E. A., et al. 2007. Novel quantitative biosystem for modeling phys-
iological ﬂuid shear stress on cells. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73:699–705.
47. Nickerson, C. A., et al. 2001. Three-dimensional tissue assemblies: novel
models for the study of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium pathogen-
esis. Infect. Immun. 69:7106–7120.
48. Nickerson, C. A., et al. 2000. Microgravity as a novel environmental signal
affecting Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium virulence. Infect. Immun.
68:3147–3152.
49. Nickerson, C. A., C. M. Ott, J. W. Wilson, R. Ramamurthy, and D. L.
Pierson. 2004. Microbial responses to microgravity and other low-shear
environments. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68:345–361.
50. O’Seaghdha, M., et al. 2006. Staphylococcus aureus protein A binding to von
Willebrand factor A1 domain is mediated by conserved IgG binding regions.
FEBS J. 273:4831–4841.
51. Pagels, M., et al. 2010. Redox sensing by a Rex-family repressor is involved
in the regulation of anaerobic gene expression in Staphylococcus aureus.
Mol. Microbiol. 76:1142–11461.
52. Palestrant, D., et al. 2004. Microbial bioﬁlms in the gut: visualization by
electron microscopy and by acridine orange staining. Ultrastruct. Pathol.
28:23–27.
53. Patti, J. M., B. L. Allen, M. J. McGavin, and M. Hook. 1994. MSCRAMM-
mediated adherence of microorganisms to host tissues. Annu. Rev. Micro-
biol. 48:585–617.
54. Pawar, P., P. K. Shin, S. A. Mousa, J. M. Ross, and K. Konstantopoulos.
2004. Fluid shear regulates the kinetics and receptor speciﬁcity of Staphy-
lococcus aureus binding to activated platelets. J. Immunol. 173:1258–1265.
55. Pearson, J. P., and I. A. Brownlee. 2010. The interaction of large bowel
microﬂora with the colonic mucus barrier. Int. J. Inﬂam. 2010:321426.
56. Pelz, A., et al. 2005. Structure and biosynthesis of staphyloxanthin from
Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biol. Chem. 280:32493–32498.
57. Rachid, S., et al. 2000. Alternative transcription factor B is involved in
regulation of bioﬁlm expression in a Staphylococcus aureus mucosal isolate.
J. Bacteriol. 182:6824–6826.
58. Radtke, A. L., J. W. Wilson, S. Sarker, and C. A. Nickerson. 2010. Analysis
of interactions of Salmonella type three secretion mutants with 3-D intestinal
epithelial cells. PLoS One 5:e15750.
59. Ray, A. J., N. J. Pultz, A. Bhalla, D. C. Aron, and C. J. Donskey. 2003.
Coexistence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci and Staphylococcus aureus
in the intestinal tracts of hospitalized patients. Clin. Infect. Dis. 37:875–881.
60. Resch, A., R. Rosenstein, C. Nerz, and F. Gotz. 2005. Differential gene
expression proﬁling of Staphylococcus aureus cultivated under bioﬁlm and
planktonic conditions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71:2663–2676.
61. Rimland, D., and B. Roberson. 1986. Gastrointestinal carriage of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J. Clin. Microbiol. 24:137–138.
62. Rosado, H., D. Doyle, J. Hinds, and P. Taylor. 2009. Low-shear modelled
microgravity alters expression of virulence determinants of Staphylococcus
aureus. Acta Astronaut. 66:408–413.
63. Rupp, C. J., C. A. Fux, and P. Stoodley. 2005. Viscoelasticity of Staphylo-
coccus aureus bioﬁlms in response to ﬂuid shear allows resistance to detach-
ment and facilitates rolling migration. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71:2175–
2178.
64. Salyers, A., and N. B. Shoemaker. 2006. Reservoirs of antibiotic resistance
genes. Anim. Biotechnol. 17:137–146.
65. Shirtliff, M. E., J. T. Mader, and A. K. Camper. 2002. Molecular interactions
in bioﬁlms. Chem. Biol. 9:859–871.
VOL. 77, 2011
LOW-FLUID-SHEAR CULTURE OF S. AUREUS
6377

66. Smith, H. 1995. The revival of interest in mechanisms of bacterial pathoge-
nicity. Biol. Rev. Camb. Philos. Soc. 70:277–316.
67. Sonnenburg, J. L., L. T. Angenent, and J. I. Gordon. 2004. Getting a grip on
things: how do communities of bacterial symbionts become established in
our intestine? Nat. Immunol. 5:569–573.
68. Valentin-Hansen, P., M. Eriksen, and C. Udesen. 2004. The bacterial Sm-like
protein Hfq: a key player in RNA transactions. Mol. Microbiol. 51:1525–1533.
69. Valle, J., et al. 2003. SarA and not B is essential for bioﬁlm development by
Staphylococcus aureus. Mol. Microbiol. 48:1075–1087.
70. Vesterlund, S., M. Karp, S. Salminen, and A. C. Ouwehand. 2006. Staphy-
lococcus aureus adheres to human intestinal mucus but can be displaced by
certain lactic acid bacteria. Microbiology 152:1819–1826.
71. Vukanti, R., E. Mintz, and L. G. Leff. 2008. Changes in gene expression of E.
coli under conditions of modeled reduced gravity. Microgravity Sci. Technol.
20:41–57.
72. Wilson, J. W., et al. 2007. Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and
virulence and reveals a role for global regulator Hfq. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 104:16299–16304.
73. Wilson, J. W., et al. 2002. Low-shear modeled microgravity alters the Sal-
monella enterica serovar Typhimurium stress response in an RpoS-indepen-
dent manner. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68:5408–5416.
74. Wilson, J. W., et al. 2002. Microarray analysis identiﬁes Salmonella genes
belonging to the low-shear modeled microgravity regulon. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 99:13807–13812.
6378
CASTRO ET AL.
APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.
