ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 13 September 2019
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01147
Edited by:
Jack J. W. A. van Loon,
VU University Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Reviewed by:
Alexander Andreev-Andrievskiy,
Institute of Biomedical Problems
(RAS), Russia
Susan Ann Bloomﬁeld,
Texas A&M University, United States
Tooru Mizuno,
University of Manitoba, Canada
*Correspondence:
Candice G. T. Tahimic
candiceginn.t.tahimic@nasa.gov
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Environmental, Aviation and Space
Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Physiology
Received: 30 March 2019
Accepted: 22 August 2019
Published: 13 September 2019
Citation:
Tahimic CGT, Paul AM,
Schreurs AS, Torres SM,
Rubinstein L, Steczina S, Lowe M,
Bhattacharya S, Alwood JS,
Ronca AE and Globus RK (2019)
Inﬂuence of Social Isolation During
Prolonged Simulated Weightlessness
by Hindlimb Unloading.
Front. Physiol. 10:1147.
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01147
Inﬂuence of Social Isolation During
Prolonged Simulated Weightlessness
by Hindlimb Unloading
Candice G. T. Tahimic1,2*, Amber M. Paul1,3, Ann-Soﬁe Schreurs1,2,
Samantha M. Torres1,4, Linda Rubinstein1,3, Sonette Steczina1,4, Moniece Lowe1,4,
Sharmila Bhattacharya1, Joshua S. Alwood1, April E. Ronca1,5 and Ruth K. Globus1
1 Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, United States, 2 KBR, Houston, TX,
United States, 3 Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, MD, United States, 4 Blue Marble Space Institute
of Science, Seattle, WA, United States, 5 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, United States
The hindlimb unloading (HU) model has been used extensively to simulate the cephalad
ﬂuid shift and musculoskeletal disuse observed in spaceﬂight with its application
expanding to study immune, cardiovascular and central nervous system responses,
among others. Most HU studies are performed with singly housed animals, although
social isolation also can substantially impact behavior and physiology, and therefore
may confound HU experimental results. Other HU variants that allow for paired
housing have been developed although no systematic assessment has been made
to understand the effects of social isolation on HU outcomes. Hence, we aimed to
determine the contribution of social isolation to tissue responses to HU. To accomplish
this, we developed a reﬁnement to the traditional NASA Ames single housing HU
system to accommodate social housing in pairs, retaining desirable features of the
original design. We conducted a 30-day HU experiment with adult, female mice that
were either singly or socially housed. HU animals in both single and social housing
displayed expected musculoskeletal deﬁcits versus housing matched, normally loaded
(NL) controls. However, select immune and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
responses were differentially impacted by the HU social environment relative to matched
NL controls. HU led to a reduction in % CD4+ T cells in singly housed, but not
in socially housed mice. Unexpectedly, HU increased adrenal gland mass in socially
housed but not singly housed mice, while social isolation increased adrenal gland mass
in NL controls. HU also led to elevated plasma corticosterone levels at day 30 in
both singly and socially housed mice. Thus, musculoskeletal responses to simulated
weightlessness are similar regardless of social environment with a few differences in
adrenal and immune responses. Our ﬁndings show that combined stressors can mask,
not only exacerbate, select responses to HU. These ﬁndings further expand the utility of
the HU model for studying possible combined effects of spaceﬂight stressors.
Keywords: hindlimb unloading, microgravity model, bone loss, muscle atrophy, immune system, spaceﬂight,
social isolation, HPA axis
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
1
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
INTRODUCTION
The spaceﬂight environment poses signiﬁcant challenges to
multiple organ systems. Microgravity exposure leads to a
cephalad ﬂuid shift (Foux et al., 1976; Thornton et al., 1987) as
well as osteopenia (Lang et al., 2004) and sarcopenia (LeBlanc
et al., 2000). Spaceﬂight alters electrolyte balance (Vorobiev et al.,
1995) as well as endocrine (Stowe et al., 2003, 2011), vision
(Zhang and Hargens, 2018) and baroreﬂex processes (Fritsch
et al., 1992; Buckey et al., 1996; Meck et al., 2001). Cardiovascular
changes include stiﬀening of the carotid arteries as seen in
astronauts returning from a 6-month ISS mission (Hughson
et al., 2016) and transient changes in heart rate variability
(Yamamoto et al., 2015). Spaceﬂight also may lead to CNS
changes including a decline in cognitive performance (Eddy et al.,
1998). Immune system dysregulation also occurs, characterized
by altered immune cell function and reactivation of viruses
(Crucian et al., 2015, 2018; Mehta et al., 2017). These ﬁndings
from astronauts are the main motivation to study rodents ﬂown
into space with the rationale that rodents are used extensively
to model human conditions on Earth and may prove useful for
understanding mechanisms and anticipating human responses to
spaceﬂight. However, limited opportunities for rodent spaceﬂight
studies, along with other challenges of conducting microgravity
experiments, stimulated interest in using ground-based rodent
models of weightlessness.
The rodent hindlimb unloading (HU) model was developed
initially to simulate the responses of the musculoskeletal system
to microgravity (Wronski and Morey-Holton, 1987; Morey-
Holton et al., 2005; Globus and Morey-Holton, 2016). To date,
its use has expanded to study the responses of other organ
systems to spaceﬂight, including immune, cardiovascular and
central nervous system (Globus and Morey-Holton, 2016). The
HU model also is utilized to study disorders on Earth such as
osteopenia and sarcopenia because features of the HU model
mimic bedrest and disuse. Initial eﬀorts to generate a rodent
model for musculoskeletal unloading entailed use of a back
harness for inducing a cephalad ﬂuid shift and musculoskeletal
disuse of the hindlimbs in singly housed animals (Morey, 1979),
which was then developed further to introduce tail suspension
which improved outcomes (Wronski and Morey-Holton, 1987).
This system employs non-invasive attachment of the tail via
orthopedic traction tape onto a pulley system that allows for
elevation of the hindlimbs; application with the custom-designed
cage enables free movement of the animal about the cage (Morey-
Holton and Globus, 2002; Morey-Holton et al., 2005). Since
then, other variants of the HU system emerged and include
partial unloading of all four limbs using a custom body harness
(Wagner et al., 2010; Ellman et al., 2013; Mortreux et al., 2018),
various methods to induce unloading such as surgical piercing
of the tail, alternative taping methods, simpliﬁed cage systems
that restrict movement, and group housing (Ferreira et al., 2011;
Maurel et al., 2016).
Single versus social housing of rodents under standard,
ambulatory conditions, can diﬀerentially impact multiple organ
systems (e.g., cardiovascular, immune, and central nervous
system) known also to be aﬀected by spaceﬂight (Beisel and
Talbot, 1987; Schmitt and Schaﬀar, 1993; D’Aunno et al., 2003;
Migeotte et al., 2003; Pierson et al., 2005; Hughson et al., 2016;
Mehta et al., 2017). Social isolation causes anxiety and depressive-
like behavior (Djordjevic et al., 2012), disrupted circadian
rhythms (Spani et al., 2003), deﬁcits in memory (McLean et al.,
2010), activation of pro-inﬂammatory transcription factors and
impairments in antioxidant responses in the brain (Djordjevic
et al., 2015). Social isolation also can stimulate the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis (Jessop and Bayer, 1989; Ros-
Simo and Valverde, 2012; Shetty and Sadananda, 2017), the
main neuroendocrine regulator of mammalian stress responses
(Bellavance and Rivest, 2014). However, other studies report
that social isolation can lead to decrements in circulating
corticosterone levels (Djordjevic et al., 2012; Ieraci et al.,
2016) although it is not clear whether these reﬂect an initial
downregulation of HPA axis activation or simply the induction
of a negative feedback loop after a state of activation. In addition,
social isolation in rodents leads to impairments in immune
function (Jessop and Bayer, 1989; Clausing et al., 1994; Shanks
et al., 1994; Wu et al., 2000; Krugel et al., 2014).
Social isolation can be a confounding factor for interpreting
experimental outcomes from both rodent spaceﬂight and
ground-based studies. In rats, 9 days of spaceﬂight reduced
periosteal bone formation and bone mass (femur dry weights)
in singly housed animals but had minimal eﬀect on bone
formation or mass in group housed animals (Morey-Holton
et al., 2000). In an interesting study, Tsvirkun et al. (2012)
report that HU (in standard, single housing) or social isolation
(without unloading) each can perturb blood pressure and
heart rate levels.
The possible contribution of social isolation to the biological
outcomes of HU has not been studied, leaving a number of
knowledge gaps in our understanding of the model for simulating
weightlessness. It is unclear whether social interactions (social
versus single housing) during HU diﬀerentially impacts organ
systems known to be responsive to HU. Rodent experiments on
the International Space Station (ISS), particularly those making
use of the NASA Rodent Research habitat, are conducted in group
housed conditions whereas most HU studies conducted to date
entail use of the standard, single housed HU model. Other groups
have developed variants of the HU model that accommodate
social housing in pairs (Ferreira et al., 2011; Lloyd et al., 2012;
Maurel et al., 2016). However, characterization of these models
in side-by-side studies with the traditional singly housed HU
model have not been conducted. Hence, there is value to further
developing and characterizing the socially housed HU model
for simulating weightlessness to better match rodent habitat
conditions on the ISS. Addressing these gaps in knowledge
will lead to an improved understanding of the contribution of
isolation to observed responses to HU, which in turn will improve
the ability to extrapolate HU results to humans in space.
To address these knowledge gaps, we aimed to (1) develop a
reﬁnement to the NASA Ames HU system, which traditionally
entails housing mice in isolation (Morey-Holton and Globus,
2002; Morey-Holton et al., 2005) to enable housing in social
pairs and (2) determine the contribution of social isolation
to the HU responses of various tissues. We hypothesized that
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
2
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
relative to social housing, single housing exacerbates HU-induced
dysfunction in select organ systems. To meet these aims and
test the hypothesis, we performed a side-by-side comparison
of this alternative social HU system versus the standard NASA
Ames single housed design and evaluated the responses of select
spaceﬂight-relevant tissues to HU.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and Experiment Design
Animal experiments were carried out in accordance with
the recommendations of Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals, 8th edition (National Research Council
(U.S.) Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals, Institute for Laboratory Animal
Research (U.S.) and National Academies Press (U.S.), 2011).
All animal experiments were conducted with prior approval
from the NASA Ames Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC). Sixteen-week old female mice that were
to undergo HU were acclimated into HU cages (paired or
single housing groups) 3 days prior to the onset of HU
(Figure 1). Normally loaded (NL) controls were housed in
standard vivarium cages either individually or in pairs. NL
controls (either paired or single housing groups) were handled
the same way as the HU groups except for the actual attachment
of traction tape and tail suspension. Animals were bred at
Ames and were wild type littermates of a cross between male
mCAT mice [B6.Cg-Tg(CAG-OTC/CAT)4033Prab/J, Jackson
Laboratories] (Schriner et al., 2005) and female C57BL/6NJ
(Jackson Laboratories). After the acclimation period, animals
were suspended onto the pulley apparatus via orthopedic traction
tape as described previously (Wronski and Morey, 1982; Morey-
Holton and Globus, 1998, 2002; Kondo et al., 2010). Responses
to the social housing HU model also were evaluated in female
C57BL/6J (Jackson Laboratories), a closely related yet distinct
strain. Refer to Supplementary Section for further details on
the C57BL/6J study. C57BL/6J and C57BL/6NJ mice diﬀer in
competency for nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase (Nnt)
expression (C57BL/6J are deletion mutants) (Freeman et al.,
2006). Compared to animals with an intact Nnt gene, C57BL/6J
mice have higher rates of H2O2 release, spontaneous oxidation
FIGURE 1 | Experiment design and groups.
of NADPH, and reduced ability to metabolize peroxide (Ronchi
et al., 2013). C57BL/6J and C57BL/6NJ strains also display
diﬀerences in metabolic phenotypes of muscle and other organs
(Fisher-Wellman et al., 2016).
All animals were supplied with standard rodent laboratory
chow (Purina, Cat# 5001) and water ad libitum. We attempted
to measure food intake to gain insight into possible diﬀerences in
body weight responses. However, accurate measurements could
not be made since HU animals generated a substantial amount
of food pellet fragments (not consumed) that inadvertently
fell through the ﬂoor grate and could not be recovered.
Enrichment consisted of cotton nestlets (Ancare, Cat# NES3600)
refreshed daily. The nestlets were split (cut into two equal parts
and stripped half of its thickness) to prevent the mice from
building ramp-like structures to load the hindlimbs. Cage and
bedding changes were performed weekly. Room temperature
was maintained within 23–24◦C (higher temperatures can be
used) with a 12 h light-12 h dark cycle. After 30 days of
HU, animals were euthanized via carbon dioxide inhalation
followed by cervical dislocation. Blood was collected from vena
cava. Soleus, spleen, and adrenal glands were collected and
immediately weighed. Tibiae were recovered and then ﬁxed
in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buﬀered saline solution
(FD Neurotechnologies) for ∼24 h at 4◦C then transferred to
70% ethanol (Sigma) for storage at 4◦C until analysis. Unless
otherwise stated, sample sizes (C57BL/6NJ) are as follows:
Single NL = 8; Single HU = 6; Social NL = 12; and Social
HU = 12. To mitigate any technical artifacts from variations in
euthanasia times across groups, one animal from each group
was euthanized sequentially, and the sequence repeated until all
animals have been euthanized for any given day. All dissections
were completed within a 7-h period.
Social HU Cage Design and Construction
The social housing HU system for mice was generated
using commercially available rat/guinea pig polycarbonate cages
(Ancare, Cat# R20HT) with ﬁlter-top lids (Ancare, Cat#
R20MBT). Holes were drilled on the walls of each cage to
accommodate two food trays as well as the spouts of two water
bottles. Food trays consisted of cryovial holders that were cut to
ﬁt into the short side wall of the cage (Nalgene, available from
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Cat# 5015-0002). The food tray was
attached to each of the two short walls, 5.5 cm above the cage
ﬂoor. A stainless steel mesh grate (Ancare, Cat# R20SSRWF) was
laid out on the cage ﬂoor. Bedding was then placed such that
it ﬁlled two thirds of the space between the cage bottom and
the steel mesh grate. In our experience, adding more bedding
is not ideal because animals tend to move the bedding to form
mounds that come in contact with their hindlimbs. The grid of
the ventilated cage lid was sawed out to create an open top. Using
a drill, openings were created on one long side of the cage wall
to install two spring attachments which were used to secure two
water bottles (one for each animal). The spouts of these water
bottles were routed into the cage 5.5 cm from the cage ﬂoor by
drilling openings on the cage wall. Two rods were attached to the
cage lids using binder clips to support two pulley systems (one
for each animal).
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
3
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
The distance that the pulley apparatus can be moved by
the animals along the suspended rod was adjusted carefully,
using rubber washers to ensure that loading of the hindlimbs
do not occur from contact with cage walls or the water sipper
(Supplementary Figure S1). In addition, the two suspension
rods were placed at an optimal distance from each other so
that cephalad regions of the animals can come in contact
while avoiding entanglement of the two sets of suspension
apparatus (Supplementary Figure S1). To prevent loading of the
hindlimbs while being weighed, HU animals were kept suspended
on a small hook apparatus set over a lab animal balance as
described in Morey-Holton and Globus (2002).
Microcomputed Tomography
Microarchitecture of the cortical and cancellous compartments of
the tibia was quantiﬁed by µCT using the SkyScan 1272 system
(Bruker). For cancellous bone morphology, the proximal tibia
was scanned at 3.5 µm resolution. A 400 µm region of interest
was 3D reconstructed with a 450 µm oﬀset from the proximal
growth plate. This region was auto-contoured using SkyScan CT
Analyzer (CTAn) Software (Bruker) to select for the cancellous
region. Cancellous parameters such as Bone Volume (BV, mm3),
Tissue Volume (TV, mm3), percent Bone Volume (BV/TV, %),
Trabecular Spacing (Tb.Sp, mm), Trabecular Thickness (Tb.Th,
mm), and Trabecular Number (Tb.N, 1/mm) were quantiﬁed
following standard µCT guidelines (Bouxsein et al., 2010). For
the analysis of cortical bone microstructure, the tibia was scanned
at 12 µm resolution. A 300 µm region that was 200 µm
proximal to the tibio-ﬁbular junction (TFJ) was auto-contoured
to analyze cortical bone parameters such as Marrow Area (Ma.Ar,
mm2), Cortical Area (Ct.Ar, mm2), Endocortical Perimeter
(Ec.Pm, mm), Periosteal Perimeter (Ps.Pm, mm), and Cortical
Thickness (Ct.Th, mm).
Flow Cytometry Analysis of White Blood
Cells
Flow cytometric analysis of white blood cells (WBC) isolated
from C57BL/6NJ was performed, as described previously (Paul
et al., 2017). Brieﬂy, peripheral blood was collected and
centrifuged at 2000×g for 15 min and plasma removed. Red
blood cell lysis buﬀer at 1X dilution (eBioscience) was added
and cells were incubated for 10 min at room temperature
on an orbital shaker followed by addition of 1X Phosphate
Buﬀered Saline Solution (PBS, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Cells
were then centrifuged at 500×g for 5 min at 4◦C to pellet
out the WBC, ﬁxed in 2% paraformaldehyde (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) for 15 min on ice, washed, and incubated with
Fc block (CD16/32 Block) for 20 min, followed by probing
with anti-CD45-FITC, anti-CD4-PE, anti-CD8a-PerCP, anti-
CD11b-PECy5, and anti-Ly6G-PE antibodies (all purchased from
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) for 1 h at room temperature in
the dark. Samples were then washed twice in 1X PBS, and
acquired using a Guava Flow Cytometer (Millipore). Unstained
and single stained compensation controls were used during
acquisition and FlowJo software (version 10.3.0) utilized for
cytometric analysis.
Measurement of Plasma Corticosterone
Levels
Peripheral blood was collected from the vena cava and introduced
into K3 EDTA tubes (Sarstedt, Cat# 41.1395.105). Centrifugation
was performed at 2000×g at room temperature for 10 min and
plasma collected. Plasma was diluted 1:100 and analyzed using a
corticosterone ELISA kit (Abcam, Cat# ab108821) according to
manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistical Analysis
Equivalence of variance was ﬁrst evaluated by Levene’s test.
If the variances were equal, two-way analysis of variance was
performed. A Tukey post hoc test was employed when an
interaction eﬀect of p < 0.05 was observed. For multi-timepoint
measures, repeated measures ANOVA was performed followed
by Tukey post hoc test. If the variances were unequal, a two-
factor linear model with interaction was employed treating
the variance with a logarithmic transformation (Harvey, 1976;
Cook and Weisberg, 1983; Aitkin, 1987), with a threshold
of p < 0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using JMP
software version 13.1.0 (SAS Institute Inc.). Data shown are
mean ± standard deviation.
RESULTS
To test the hypothesis that social isolation impacts tissue
responses to HU, we developed a reﬁnement of the traditional
NASA Ames HU cage design that allows paired housing of
animals (Figure 2). We then performed a 30-day HU study
under these social housing conditions, side-by-side with animals
maintained according to the standard NASA single housing HU
system (Figure 1). Animals selected for this study were female
C57BL/6NJ mice shown previously to be sensitive to bone loss
caused by HU (Sankaran et al., 2017). Controls (normally loaded,
NL) were age- and sex-matched animals freely ambulating in
standard mouse cages.
To begin to gain insight on whether responses to social
housing HU were strain-speciﬁc, we also performed a separate
30-day HU experiment in socially housed female C57BL/6J mice
(Supplementary Figures S3–S8), another commonly used strain
to study musculoskeletal responses to disuse. Due to logistical
constraints, this study had a smaller subset of experimental
outcomes and only responses of socially housed NL controls and
HU groups were evaluated.
Body weights were measured at multiple time points during
the HU period. In our experience, a modest weight loss (typically
<10%) may occur within a week of HU. In C57BL/6NJ mice,
there was a modest yet signiﬁcant decline in body weights at
days 7, 14, 21, 28, and 30 in the socially housed HU group
compared to its NL control. At any given day of weighing, the
magnitude of the diﬀerence in mean body weights of the socially
housed HU group relative to its NL control was between 3 and
8%. There were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in body weights in the
singly housed HU cohort versus singly housed NL controls at
any time point (Figure 3 and Supplementary Table S1). We also
looked into possible behaviors unique to the NL and HU social
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
4
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
FIGURE 2 | Side view of (A) single housing HU and (B) social housing HU cage design.
housing groups that could contribute to body weight diﬀerences.
This was done by scoring select time periods in videos taken
during the dark and light cycles (Supplementary Methods).
Huddling, an adaptation that helps conserve body heat and
therefore fat reserves, manifested in socially housed NL controls
but not in socially housed HU animals. This was because physical
contact between socially housed HU animals can only occur
via cephalad regions. In addition, we observed a novel behavior
wherein socially housed HU mice pass nestlets (enrichment) to
or from their cagemates. Socially housed NL controls did not
engage in this behavior (Supplementary Figure S2). In C57BL/6J
mice, HU animals and their corresponding NL controls did not
diﬀer in body weights at any of the time points (Supplementary
Figure S3 and Supplementary Table S2).
FIGURE 3 | Body weights from day 0 to 30 of hindlimb unloading (HU) and
corresponding normally loaded (NL) controls in singly and socially housed
female C57BL/6NJ mice. ∗NL social and HU social groups display statistically
signiﬁcant differences at indicated days at p < 0.05 using two-way repeated
measures ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc test. Values are expressed as
means. For clarity, error bars are omitted. Refer to Supplementary Table S1
for a full list of mean and SD values. Sample sizes: Single NL = 4; Single
HU = 6; Social NL = 12; and Social HU = 12.
Muscle
and
bone,
conventionally
considered
mechanosensitive tissues, are profoundly sensitive to unloading.
Hence the impact of social isolation on the response of these
tissues to HU was examined. The weight of the soleus, a postural
muscle known to undergo atrophy in response to spaceﬂight
and unloading (Musacchia et al., 1983; Steﬀen and Musacchia,
1986; Haida et al., 1989; Desplanches et al., 1990) was measured.
Experimental groups had comparable body weights at the onset
of the 3-day acclimation period in assigned cages. However,
there was a trend (non-signiﬁcant) for body weight diﬀerences
(0.8–1.0 g) across groups at the onset of HU. To account for
these slight diﬀerences, tissue weights were normalized to
body weights by dividing tissue weight by the body weight at
euthanasia. Use of actual tissue weights did not change the main
results or interpretation (Refer to Supplementary Tables S3, S4
for mean and SD of actual tissue weights).
In C57BL/6NJ mice, HU led to decrements in normalized
soleus weight (Figure 4), whether the mice were housed
singly or socially. The magnitudes of muscle atrophy between
single and social housing HU cohorts were 44 and 36%
respectively. There were no diﬀerences in normalized soleus
weights between the single and social HU groups. In addition,
values for singly and socially housed NL controls were
comparable (Figure 4). In C57BL/6J mice, social housing HU
also led to the expected decrement in normalized soleus weight
(Supplementary Figure S4).
Microcomputed tomography (µCT) analyses were performed
to determine the contribution of social isolation to HU-induced
deﬁcits in structure of cancellous (Figures 5A–D) and cortical
(Figures 6A–E) bone compartments. As expected, in C57BL/6NJ
mice HU led to deﬁcits in some cancellous structural parameters,
speciﬁcally % BV/TV (Figure 5A) and Tb.N (Figure 5D). Tb.Th
(Figure 5B) and Tb.Sp (Figure 5C) were unchanged by HU
compared to NL controls. HU also led to deﬁcits in some cortical
parameters including increased Ma.Ar (Figure 6A) and Ec.Pm
(Figure 6E) as well as decreased Ct.Ar (Figure 6B), and Ct.Th
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
5
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
FIGURE 4 | Soleus weights normalized to day 30 body weights of C57BL/6NJ
mice. Social envt: Social environment. ∗Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05
using two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc test. NS: Not signiﬁcant.
FIGURE 5 | Microcomputed tomography (µCT) analysis of cancellous
compartment of proximal tibiae from C57BL/6NJ mice. (A) % Bone Volume,
% BV/TV; (B) Trabecular Thickness, Tb.Th; (C) Trabecular Spacing, Tb.Sp;
and (D) Trabecular Number, Tb.N. Two-way ANOVA was performed. NS, not
signiﬁcant.
(Figure 6C) while Ps.Pm (Figure 6D) was unchanged in HU
versus NL controls. Single housing, independent of HU, also
led to modest deﬁcits in some cancellous structural parameters
FIGURE 6 | Microcomputed tomography analysis of cortical compartment of
tibiae from C57BL/6NJ mice. (A) Marrow Area, Ma.Ar; (B) Cortical Area,
Ct.Ar; (C) Cortical Thickness, Ct.Th; (D) Periosteal Perimeter, Ps.Pm; and (E)
Endocortical Perimeter, Ec.Pm. Two-way ANOVA was performed. NS, not
signiﬁcant.
including increased Tb.Sp (Figure 5C) and decreased Tb.N
(Figure 5D). Further, the type of social environment did not
signiﬁcantly alter the response to HU in any of the cancellous
(Figures 5A–D) and cortical (Figures 6A–E) µCT parameters
measured, as there were no interaction eﬀects evident by two-
way ANOVA.
In C57BL/6J mice, there were no diﬀerences between socially
housed groups versus NL controls in BV/TV (Supplementary
Figure S5A), Tb.Sp (Supplementary Figure S5C), and Tb.N
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
6
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
(Supplementary Figure S5D). In contrast, there was a ∼15%
decrement in Tb.Th in the HU cohort relative to NL controls
(Supplementary Figure S5B). Compared to NL controls,
socially housed HU mice displayed a 16% increase in Ma.Ar
(Supplementary Figure S6A). There was a modest increase of
9% in Ec.Pm (Supplementary Figure S6E) in socially housed
HU mice versus NL controls. These were consistent with the
trend seen for the same parameters in C57BL/6NJ mice. Ct. Ar
was comparable between NL and HU groups of socially housed
C57BL/6J mice (Supplementary Figure S6B) in contrast to the
HU-induced deﬁcits (although modest) observed in C57BL/6NJ
mice (Figure 6B). Ps.Pm increased by 4% (Supplementary
Figure S6D) although its biological relevance is unlikely due to
the small magnitude of change. Overall, skeletal responses to
HU of socially housed groups in both strains displayed similar
trends and recapitulated expected disuse-induced changes in
bone structure (Globus and Morey-Holton, 2016).
To begin to gain insight into how social isolation during
HU may impact the HPA axis, adrenal weights were measured
at euthanasia and normalized to body weights (Figure 7) and
plasma corticosterone levels were measured at the termination
of the study (Figure 8). Adrenal hypertrophy can result from
exposure to stressors such as social isolation (Gamallo et al.,
1986; Westenbroek et al., 2005; Djordjevic et al., 2012) as well
as crowding (Gamallo et al., 1986). In C57BL/6NJ mice, singly
housed NL controls showed a 43% increase in normalized
adrenal weight compared to socially housed NL controls
(Figure 7). Singly and socially housed groups showed diﬀerential
adrenal responses to HU. Whereas there were no statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerences due to HU in singly housed mice, HU
increased normalized adrenal weights by 29% compared to
NL controls in socially housed mice. Singly housed HU and
socially housed HU groups showed comparable values (Figure 7).
In socially housed, C57BL/6J mice, HU did not cause a
statistically signiﬁcant increase in normalized adrenal weights
(Supplementary Figure S7), although the trend was consistent
with the diﬀerences observed in socially housed C57BL/6NJ mice
(Figure 7). Plasma corticosterone levels at the termination of
the experiment were evaluated in singly and socially housed
C57BL/6NJ mice. HU led to increased levels in circulating
corticosterone regardless of social environment (Figure 8).
Spleen weights and blood cell populations also were examined
to assess the contribution of social isolation on aspects of
immunity during HU. In both C57BL/6J and C57BL/6NJ
mice, HU led to a reduction in spleen weights (normalized
to body weights) compared to NL controls (Figure 9 and
Supplementary Figure S8). The type of social environment
did not signiﬁcantly alter splenic weights (Figure 9). To
further evaluate immune eﬀects, ﬂow cytometric analyses of
peripheral WBCs of C57BL/6NJ mice were performed to
calculate the percentage of select leukocyte subpopulations
relative to total WBC, using the common leukocyte antigen
(CD45) as a general WBC marker (Figures 10A–D). Compared
to NL controls, HU under single housing conditions led to
a reduction in the percentage of CD4+ cells within CD45+
cells (Figure 10A) while this was not observed in HU under
socially housed conditions. CD4+ immunoreactivity marks
FIGURE 7 | Left and right (combined) adrenal weights normalized to day 30
body weights of C57BL/6NJ mice. ∗Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 using
two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey post hoc test. NS: Not signiﬁcant. Sample
sizes: Single NL = 5; Single HU = 6; Social NL = 12; and Social HU = 12.
FIGURE 8 | Plasma corticosterone levels of C57BL/6NJ mice. Two-way
ANOVA with loglinear variance model was applied since unequal variance was
observed. NS: Not signiﬁcant. Sample sizes: Single NL = 8; Single HU = 5;
Social NL = 12; and Social HU = 11.
a subpopulation of T-helper cells. HU did not alter the
percentage of CD8+/CD45+cells, a subpopulation of T-cytotoxic
cells, in either social environment (Figure 10B). Further, the
percentage of CD11b+ cells which broadly marks myeloid
cells, including neutrophils and monocytes was increased by
HU irrespective of social environment (Figure 10C). Similarly,
HU led to an increased percentage of neutrophils marked by
Ly6G+CD11b+ immunoreactivity (Figure 10D) regardless of
social environment.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
7
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
FIGURE 9 | Spleen weights normalized to day 30 body weights of
C57BL/6NJ mice. Two-way ANOVA was performed. NS: Not signiﬁcant.
DISCUSSION
We have developed and validated a reﬁnement to the NASA
Ames HU model that accommodates paired housing of animals
while retaining desirable features of the original design such
as non-invasive attachment of the animal to the suspension
harness and range of movement about the cage. An additional
functionality to the current design includes individual access
to food and water (not accessible to the other animal); thus,
studies requiring customization of food or water as treatments
can be readily conducted. Another feature of the current design
includes the use of commercial-oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS) materials,
which can help achieve signiﬁcant cost and time savings over
the previous standard version (Morey-Holton and Globus, 2002).
These cage materials are compatible with typical cleaning and
sterilization systems found in animal facilities. Finally, the cages
occupy a smaller footprint since cage bottoms can be stacked for
easy storage and improved transport. Overall, these changes to
the design were intended to beneﬁt investigators interested in
conducting HU experiments.
Other groups have reported the use of paired housing HU
systems for mice (Ferreira et al., 2011; Lloyd et al., 2012; Maurel
et al., 2016). Similarities between the current design and a
previously reported HU system (Ferreira et al., 2011) include the
use of COTS components, individual access to food and water
and physical contact of cephalad regions of pair housed animals.
Notable diﬀerences include the manner by which tail attachment
to the suspension apparatus is achieved. In the model developed
by Ferreira et al. (2011), the tail is secured to the suspension
apparatus via piercing of the tail with surgical wire which
may prove useful should there be concerns about tail necrosis
and/or animals coming down from suspension. In our hands,
however, we have not encountered tail necrosis nor accidental
release from suspension in our HU studies of short or long
duration (up to 30 days) using the tail traction approach. Thus
FIGURE 10 | Percentages of white blood cell subpopulations in peripheral
blood of C57BL/6NJ mice. (A) and (B) were analyzed by two-way ANOVA
while (C) and (D) had unequal variances and were therefore analyzed by
two-way ANOVA with loglinear variance model. NS: Not signiﬁcant.
∗Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 using Tukey post hoc test. NS: Not
signiﬁcant. Sample sizes: Single NL = 8; Single HU = 5; Social NL = 12; and
Social HU = 12.
our system has the advantage of avoiding the stress associated
with anesthesia and tissue injury from surgical procedures. In
addition, the current HU system includes the use of a ﬂoor
grate and bedding that covers the entirety of the cage ﬂoor in
contrast to the Ferreira et al. (2011) design where no ﬂoor grate
was employed and bedding partially covered the cage bottom.
The choice of ﬂooring (grate, bedding or bare) can potentially
impact experimental results. Hence, variations in ﬂooring across
current HU systems is one consideration in experiment design
and when comparing across studies. Another diﬀerence includes
the range of movement about the cage. Our current design retains
the pulley apparatus of the standard NASA Ames HU system
(Morey-Holton and Globus, 2002), which generally allows for
ambulation within most of the available cage area (close to half
of the total cage area if socially housed). In contrast, the Ferreira
et al. (2011) model secures the suspension apparatus via a ﬁxed
point which results in a range of movement restricted to a deﬁned
radius. Another group has conducted HU in mice housed in
pairs although the design of the suspension apparatus prevented
physical contact between animals (Lloyd et al., 2012; Krause
et al., 2017), in contrast to our current design and the Ferreira
et al. (2011) system which both allow cephalad regions of the
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
8
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
animals to come in direct contact. Despite the prior existence
of other HU designs that accommodate group housing, no other
study has systematically assessed the contribution of the social
environment in tissue responses to HU, a knowledge gap that
we have begun to address here and highlights the novelty of
this current study.
We validated this alternative social housing HU system
by comparing it to the traditional single housing HU model.
Standard housing controls were age- and sex-matched animals
freely ambulating in standard mouse cages. Alternative controls
have been used in other studies, such as restrained animals
wherein the tail is attached to the suspension apparatus
without elevating hindquarters (no musculoskeletal unloading,
orthostatic suspension) (Gaignier et al., 2014; Rettig et al., 2019).
One study reports that tail restraint in itself can lead to blood
pressure and heart rate changes similar to that observed in singly
housed HU rats (Tsvirkun et al., 2012), changes which were not
observed in singly housed freely ambulating animals. Another
variant to HU experiment design is to house ambulatory controls
in HU cages (Huang et al., 2018). We opted for freely ambulating
controls in standard vivarium cages. Although the literature is
mixed, grate surfaces may alter HPA axis responses to stressors
(Freed et al., 2008; Giral et al., 2011), and orthostatic suspension
tail restraint, can itself cause stress responses (Tsvirkun et al.,
2012). We recognize that selection of a diﬀerent control group
(e.g., restrained mice) may change some of the conclusions
drawn from this study.
Males were not included in this study and it is well known that
some behavioral and physiological responses to social isolation
are sexually dimorphic (Caruso et al., 2017; Burke et al., 2018;
Matsuda et al., 2018). For example, short-term isolation in female
adults increases fear responses, as evaluated by contextual fear
memory test, but not in age-matched males (Matsuda et al., 2018).
Hence, it possible that some outcomes measured in this study
may diﬀer between males and females which can be addressed
in future investigations.
In C57BL/6NJ mice, singly housed HU and NL controls
had comparable body weights throughout the experiment while
socially housed HU animals displayed a modest decrease in body
weights compared to their corresponding controls. The reason
for the persistent diﬀerence in body weights in the socially housed
groups requires further study (food intake could not be reliably
measured). It is possible that behaviors unique to the NL and
HU social housing groups may play a role in these diﬀerences.
Novel behaviors such as nestlet manipulation could have led to an
overall increase in activity levels in socially housed HU animals
compared to NL controls, and therefore may result in lower
body weights of the socially housed HU mice. Unlike C57BL/6NJ
mice, socially housed HU and NL control C57BL/6J animals
had comparable body weights. These ﬁndings from C57BL/6J
females are consistent with the report of Ferreira et al. (2011)
using the same strain, sex and age at onset of HU (personal
communication with Dr. M. Brown). The underlying basis for
these observations is not yet understood, although the diﬀerent
metabolic phenotypes of these two strains (Fisher-Wellman et al.,
2016) may have contributed to the discrete eﬀects of social
housing HU on body weights.
In both strains tested (C57BL/6J and C57BL/6NJ), housing
HU mice in social pairs led to the expected decrements in
bone microstructural parameters and soleus muscle weights.
The magnitudes of musculoskeletal deﬁcits induced by HU
between singly and socially housed animals were similar. One
interpretation of these ﬁndings is that loss of mechanical
loading and/or ﬂuid shifts contribute primarily to the osteopenia
and sarcopenia caused by the traditional model of simulated
weightlessness, while social isolation does not appear to
signiﬁcantly impact these outcomes.
However, since HU
regardless of social environment led to increases in circulating
corticosterone levels, we could not completely rule out the
possible contribution of neuroendocrine stress responses (from
other sources) to these observed musculoskeletal deﬁcits. Further,
direct measures of muscle function (e.g., hindlimb grip strength)
and bone mechanical properties (e.g., three point bending
of tibia or femur) were not conducted due to logistical
constraints. Hence, it remains to be elucidated whether the social
environment can diﬀerentially impact muscle function and bone
strength or whether magnitudes of the deﬁcits (if any) will be
similar to bone and muscle outputs in this study.
Immune system dysregulation occurs during both short
and long duration spaceﬂight missions (∼6 months) (Crucian
et al., 2015, 2018). Spaceﬂight-induced alterations in immune
function include reactivation of herpes viruses (Mehta et al.,
2017) as well as changes in the distribution of immune cell
populations (Gridley et al., 2009; Morukov et al., 2011). In this
study, simulated weightlessness by HU caused a decrement in
spleen weight regardless of social environment. Our ﬁndings
on HU-induced spleen atrophy is consistent with that observed
in autoimmune disease (Dillon et al., 1982) and often in
spaceﬂight (Gridley et al., 2003, 2013), while decrements in spleen
mass have long been associated with chronically elevated levels
of corticosterone and stress (Batuman et al., 1990; Voorhees
et al., 2013). Splenectomy compromises the immune system
by increasing susceptibility to infections (Sullivan et al., 1978).
Compromised immunity in asplenic individuals are primarily
seen in reduced Ig class switching and B cell immunity, and
although not studied in this report, reduced pre- and pro-B
cell populations, along with reduced spleen weight, also have
been described in bone loss models (Panaroni et al., 2015).
However, it must be noted that other factors apart from immune
perturbations could give rise to changes in spleen weight. While
the spleen is regarded as a secondary lymphoid organ, it serves
additional functions in terms of RBC maintenance and iron
storage (Pivkin et al., 2016). Furthermore, the spleen also can
accommodate ﬂuid pressure shifts by widening or narrowing
internal splenic blood vessels in response to signaling atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF) from cardiac myocytes (Kaufman, 1992;
Sultanian et al., 2001; Kaufman and Levasseur, 2003), which
may serve an important role during microgravity-related ﬂuid
pressure shifts.
In contrast to our ﬁndings in the musculoskeletal system,
we observed that some aspects of the immune response to HU
can be diﬀerentially impacted by the social environment. In
C57BL/6NJ mice, HU reduced the percentage of CD4+/CD45+
cells (subpopulation of T-helper cells) compared to NL controls
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
9
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
in singly housed mice, but not in socially housed mice. These
ﬁndings were consistent with other reports of decreased T
cell numbers in studies using singly housed mice as well as
increased susceptibility to infections in crew members during
and after ﬂight (Gridley et al., 2009; Crucian et al., 2015,
2018; Mehta et al., 2017). Diﬀerential changes in immune
cell populations in HU mice have been reported by others
but this was not always observed, with diﬀerent timepoints
of collection likely playing a factor in these outcomes. For
example, HU (4 days) increased blood neutrophil counts (Sanzari
et al., 2013) while HU (21 days) reduced B cells and decreased
T-helper (CD4+)/T-cytotoxic (CD8+) ratio of mouse splenocytes
(Gaignier et al., 2014). Others also have reported reduced CD4+
cells in HU (singly housed animals) (Wei et al., 2003; Wang
et al., 2007), suggesting disrupted immunity. One important
implication of our ﬁndings for future spaceﬂight missions is
that facilitating social interactions can potentially mitigate some
of the spaceﬂight-induced immune impairments. In addition,
studies report elevation of absolute WBCs and neutrophils in
astronauts upon landing (Kaur et al., 2004), along with reduced
T cell function during short-term (Stowe et al., 2011) and long-
term (Crucian et al., 2015) spaceﬂight, lasting weeks and months,
respectively. HU regardless of social environment increased
the percentage of myeloid populations (CD11b+) and a subset
within this population, speciﬁcally neutrophils (Ly6G+CD11b+).
Although there are other possible interpretations, these ﬁndings
suggest that some immune cell populations (e.g., neutrophils)
may be more sensitive to perturbations in gravitational loading
and/or ﬂuid shifts than others. Due to logistical limitations,
characterization of immune cell populations on C57BL/6J mice
was not conducted. Further studies are needed to evaluate strain-
dependence of these immune responses. Taken together, our
ﬁndings indicate that HU and social isolation can both have
discrete and interactive eﬀects on the immune system.
Our ﬁndings also indicate that the social environment can
diﬀerentially impact some aspects of the HPA axis in response
to HU. In C57BL/6NJ mice, singly housed NL controls showed
increased adrenal weights compared to socially housed controls
consistent with ﬁndings of others (Djordjevic et al., 2012). In
the present study, there were no diﬀerences between singly
housed NL control and HU groups, suggesting that HU did
not exacerbate any adrenal weight changes incurred by social
isolation and vice versa. Adrenal weights were increased in
socially housed HU cohorts compared to corresponding NL
controls. Taken together, our results are consistent with the
possibility that both prolonged simulated weightlessness and
social isolation can induce chronic stress (adrenal hypertrophy)
although the eﬀects of each factor are not additive. These ﬁndings
also suggest that social isolation can mask the eﬀects of HU on
adrenal hypertrophy.
The socially housed animals (NL and HU) in this study had
no prior history as cagemates with the exception of one HU
pair. To minimize the contribution of stress responses from
unfamiliar cagemates and/or a new cage environment, animals
were acclimated with their new cagemates for 3 days prior to
HU. However, it is conceivable that stress from housing with
an unfamiliar individual may have contributed to some of the
HPA axis results, although assessment of the values for the pair
with a longer history of co-habitation did not show any obvious
diﬀerences compared to the other 10 socially housed mice.
Other studies suggest beneﬁts from less frequent cage and
bedding changes which is thought to facilitate the maintenance
of environmental olfactory cues thereby minimizing stress. For
example pup mortality in C57BL/6J mice was reduced when
cage changes were performed every 14 or 21 days instead of
every 7 days (Reeb-Whitaker et al., 2001). In our experience,
daily changes of nestlets were necessary to minimize soiling and
to prevent the buildup of ramp-like structures that may lead
to undesirable loading of the hindlimbs in HU animals. Cages
and bedding were changed weekly which allows for retention
of olfactory cues.
There were no signiﬁcant correlations between body weights
and normalized adrenal gland weights nor plasma corticosterone
levels (data not shown). Hence, we reason that it is less likely
that the observed body weight diﬀerences in singly and socially
housed C57BL/6NJ HU animals can be attributed solely to HPA
axis reactivity. There were no diﬀerences in adrenal gland weights
in socially housed HU and control C57BL/6J mice in our study,
consistent with ﬁndings of Ferreira et al. (2011) from pair-
housed HU (for 28 days) in females of the same strain and age.
Collectively these results indicate that HPA axis responses to HU
can be strain-dependent. In this current study, HU regardless
of social environment increased circulating corticosterone levels
in C57BL/6NJ mice, although there was wide within-group
variance. Taken together, our ﬁndings suggest that both social
isolation and HU in females can lead to responses typically
associated with HPA axis activation such as increased adrenal
weights and corticosterone levels.
The HPA axis interacts with the hypothalamic-pituitary-
gonadal (HPG) axis (Mastorakos et al., 2006). Investigating
the eﬀects of HPA on the HPG axis was outside the scope
and hypotheses of this study. However, we recognize that
alterations in neuroendocrine signals can have an impact on
ovarian function which in turn can drive skeletal changes
independent of unloading. Estrogen deﬁciency (Roggia et al.,
2001) and unloading (Shahnazari et al., 2012) each can activate
bone remodeling. When combined (e.g., HU or spaceﬂight
ovariectomized animals) (Turner et al., 1998; Keune et al.,
2015), unloading caused bone loss greater than that from
ovariectomy alone, indicating bone loss is multi-factorial
and includes systemic and local inputs. The eﬀects of long
duration skeletal unloading on ovarian function is not well
understood. In rats, HU tends to reduce estrogen levels and
cause prolonged diestrus, changes associated with elevated
levels of corticosterone (Tou et al., 2004) together with the
expected osteopenia (Tou et al., 2005). Further studies are
needed to elucidate the interactions of HPA and HPG axes
with musculoskeletal unloading and how it impacts responses
to microgravity.
Tight regulation of the HPA axis is critical for the maintenance
of tissue health, including the immune system (Bellavance and
Rivest, 2014). Elevated levels of glucocorticoids resulting from
chronic stress, exogenous therapy, or endocrine disorders can
lead to immune dysfunction and increased osteoclast activity
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
10
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
that contributes to bone loss (Frenkel et al., 2015). Individuals
with Cushing’s disease, a neuroendocrine disorder characterized
by over-production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
and therefore cortisol, display immune impairments, such as
decreased CD4+ populations, which we also observed in singly
housed HU mice. Neutrophils highly express 11β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 (11β-HSD1), which converts cortisone
and 11-dehydrocorticosterone into their respective active forms,
cortisol and corticosterone. Neutrophils have been reported to
be the main population of immune cells expressing 11β-HSD1
in an inﬂammation model of peritonitis (Coutinho et al.,
2016). Our ﬁndings indicate that HU regardless of social
environment led to increased percentage of neutrophils and
circulating corticosterone levels. We postulate that the increase
in neutrophils could have contributed to the elevation in
circulating corticosterone levels observed during HU. It is
currently unclear whether the HPA axis contributes to the
immune changes observed in HU or vice versa. Establishing
the direct link between the HPA axis and the observed HU-
induced immune changes in singly and socially housed animals
needs further study.
Percent CD4+ population and adrenal weights are the two
outcomes that show diﬀerences between singly and socially
housed animals. Although comprising a small subset of the
outcomes measured in this study, changes in CD4+ population
(T-helper) and HPA axis signals can have a profound impact
on immunity and other biological processes. Taken together,
our ﬁndings have important implications for the use of the
HU model to simulate exposure to the spaceﬂight environment.
The possible inﬂuence of social isolation and HPA axis
responses should be taken into account when using and
interpreting results obtained from the traditional HU model.
In addition, the suitability of these two models in meeting
speciﬁc experimental objectives needs to be considered. For
instance, studies focusing on multiple aspects of the spaceﬂight
environment such as social isolation stress and microgravity,
may beneﬁt from employing the traditional single housing
HU model. In contrast, investigations that aim to deﬁne
physiological changes that are gravity-dependent (excluding
social isolation stress) may be better conducted using the social
housing HU model.
In summary, we developed and validated an alternative
social housing HU system that retains desirable features of the
traditional NASA Ames HU system. We found that deﬁcits in
muscle and bone microarchitecture observed in HU mice were
fundamentally a response to changes in gravitational loading
(i.e., hindquarter disuse and ﬂuid shifts) while components of
the immune system and HPA axis were diﬀerentially impacted
by the social environment during HU. While not in absolute
solitude, social conﬁnement is experienced in launch/landing
and on-board the ISS and is therefore of high relevance to
spaceﬂight, especially for long duration missions. The availability
of both single and social housing HU models can facilitate studies
that aim to distinguish the eﬀects of social interactions on the
HPA axis and immune system, thereby expanding the utility of
the HU model for studying how the spaceﬂight environment
impacts organ systems.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
manuscript and/or the Supplementary Files.
ETHICS STATEMENT
Animals experiments were carried out in accordance with
the recommendations of Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals, 8th edition (National Research Council
(U.S.) Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals, Institute for Laboratory Animal
Research (U.S.) and National Academies Press (U.S.), 2011).
All animal experiments were conducted with prior approval
from the NASA Ames Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
CT, AS, and RG conceived and designed the study. CT, AS, ST,
SS, AP, LR, and ML collected the data. RG, JA, CT, and ST
conceptualized and designed the social housing HU cages. CT,
ST, SS, ML, AS, LR, and AP analyzed the data. CT, RG, AS, AP,
AR, LR, and SB interpreted the data. CT wrote the ﬁrst draft of
the manuscript. RG and AP wrote sections of the manuscript.
All authors contributed to the manuscript revision, read, and
approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from the NASA Space Biology
Program NNH14ZTT001N (RG). SB was supported by the NASA
Space Biology grants NNX15AB42G and NNX13AN38G. AP, AS,
and LR were supported by fellowships from the NASA Space
Biology Postdoctoral Program (NPP).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Stephanie Solis DVM and Allison Brown of LifeSource
Biomedical Services for helpful suggestions in cage design, Mohit
Nalavadi and Ryan Scott for their assistance in the creation of
social housing HU cages, and Julia Adams and Dr. Masahiro
Terada for their assistance in the animal experiments. We thank
Adam Morris and Dr. Sulekha Anand for advice on statistical
methods, and Dr. Egle Cekanaviciute for helpful suggestions and
comments on the manuscript.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2019.
01147/full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
11
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
REFERENCES
Aitkin, M. (1987). Modelling variance heterogeneity in normal regression using
GLIM. J. R. Stat. Soc. 36, 332–339. doi: 10.2307/2347792
Batuman, O. A., Sajewski, D., Ottenweller, J. E., Pitman, D. L., and Natelson, B. H.
(1990). Eﬀects of repeated stress on T cell numbers and function in rats. Brain
Behav. Immun. 4, 105–117. doi: 10.1016/0889-1591(90)90013-g
Beisel, W. R., and Talbot, J. M. (1987). The eﬀects of space ﬂight on
immunocompetence. Immunol. Today 8, 197–201. doi: 10.1016/0167-5699(87)
90153-8
Bellavance, M. A., and Rivest, S. (2014). The HPA - immune axis and the
immunomodulatory actions of glucocorticoids in the brain. Front. Immunol.
5:136. doi: 10.3389/ﬁmmu.2014.00136
Bouxsein, M. L., Boyd, S. K., Christiansen, B. A., Guldberg, R. E., Jepsen, K. J.,
and Muller, R. (2010). Guidelines for assessment of bone microstructure in
rodents using micro-computed tomography. J. Bone. Miner. Res. 25, 1468–1486.
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.141
Buckey, J. C. Jr., Lane, L. D., Levine, B. D., Watenpaugh, D. E., Wright, S. J., Moore,
W. E., et al. (1996). Orthostatic intolerance after spaceﬂight. J. Appl. Physiol. 81,
7–18. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1996.81.1.7
Burke, K., Screven, L. A., and Dent, M. L. (2018). CBA/CaJ mouse ultrasonic
vocalizations depend on prior social experience. PLoS One 13:e0197774. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0197774
Caruso, M. J., Kamens, H. M., and Cavigelli, S. A. (2017). Exposure to chronic
variable social stress during adolescence alters aﬀect-related behaviors and
adrenocortical activity in adult male and female inbred mice. Dev. Psychobiol.
59, 679–687. doi: 10.1002/dev.21541
Clausing, P., Bocker, T., Diekgerdes, J., Gartner, K., Guttner, J., Haemisch, A., et al.
(1994). Social isolation modiﬁes the response of mice to experimental Mengo
virus infection. J. Exp. Anim. Sci. 36, 37–54.
Cook, R. D., and Weisberg, S. (1983). Diagnostics for heteroscedasticity in
regression. Biometrika 70, 1–10. doi: 10.2307/2335938
Coutinho, A. E., Kipari, T. M., Zhang, Z., Esteves, C. L., Lucas, C. D.,
Gilmour, J. S., et al. (2016). 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Type 1 is
expressed in neutrophils and restrains an inﬂammatory response in male mice.
Endocrinology 157, 2928–2936. doi: 10.1210/en.2016-1118
Crucian, B., Stowe, R. P., Mehta, S., Quiriarte, H., Pierson, D., and Sams, C. (2015).
Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration spaceﬂight. NPJ
Microgravity 1:15013. doi: 10.1038/npjmgrav.2015.13
Crucian, B. E., Chouker, A., Simpson, R. J., Mehta, S., Marshall, G., Smith,
S. M., et al. (2018). Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight: potential
countermeasures for deep space exploration missions. Front. Immunol. 9:1437.
doi: 10.3389/ﬁmmu.2018.01437
D’Aunno, D. S., Dougherty, A. H., DeBlock, H. F., and Meck, J. V. (2003). Eﬀect
of short- and long-duration spaceﬂight on QTc intervals in healthy astronauts.
Am. J. Cardiol. 91, 494–497. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9149(02)03259-9
Desplanches, D., Mayet, M. H., Ilyina-Kakueva, E. I., Sempore, B., and Flandrois,
R. (1990). Skeletal muscle adaptation in rats ﬂown on Cosmos 1667. J. Appl.
Physiol. 68, 48–52. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1990.68.1.48
Dillon, A. M., Stein, H. B., and English, R. A. (1982). Splenic atrophy in systemic
lupus erythematosus. Ann. Intern. Med. 96, 40–43.
Djordjevic, J., Djordjevic, A., Adzic, M., Mitic, M., Lukic, I., and Radojcic, M. B.
(2015). Alterations in the Nrf2-Keap1 signaling pathway and its downstream
target genes in rat brain under stress. Brain Res. 1602, 20–31. doi: 10.1016/j.
brainres.2015.01.010
Djordjevic, J., Djordjevic, A., Adzic, M., and Radojcic, M. B. (2012). Eﬀects of
chronic social isolation on Wistar rat behavior and brain plasticity markers.
Neuropsychobiology 66, 112–119. doi: 10.1159/000338605
Eddy, D. R., Schiﬂett, S. G., Schlegel, R. E., and Shehab, R. L. (1998). Cognitive
performance aboard the life and microgravity spacelab. Acta Astronaut. 43,
193–210. doi: 10.1016/s0094-5765(98)00154-4
Ellman, R., Spatz, J., Cloutier, A., Palme, R., Christiansen, B. A., and Bouxsein, M. L.
(2013). Partial reductions in mechanical loading yield proportional changes
in bone density, bone architecture, and muscle mass. J. Bone. Miner. Res. 28,
875–885. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1814
Ferreira, J. A., Crissey, J. M., and Brown, M. (2011). An alternant method to the
traditional NASA hindlimb unloading model in mice. J. Vis. Exp. 49:e2467.
doi: 10.3791/2467
Fisher-Wellman, K. H., Ryan, T. E., Smith, C. D., Gilliam, L. A., Lin, C. T., Reese,
L. R., et al. (2016). A direct comparison of metabolic responses to high-fat diet
in C57BL/6J and C57BL/6NJ mice. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 65, 3249–3261.
doi: 10.2337/db16-0291
Foux, A., Seliktar, R., and Valero, A. (1976). Eﬀects of lower body negative pressure
(LBNP) on the distribution of body ﬂuids. J. Appl. Physiol. 41(5 Pt 1), 719–726.
doi: 10.1152/jappl.1976.41.5.719
Freed, C., Martinez, V., Sarter, M., DeVries, C., and Bergdall, V. (2008). Operant
task performance and corticosterone concentrations in rats housed directly on
bedding and on wire. J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci. 47, 18–22.
Freeman, H. C., Hugill, A., Dear, N. T., Ashcroft, F. M., and Cox, R. D. (2006).
Deletion of nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase: a new quantitive trait
locus accounting for glucose intolerance in C57BL/6J mice. Diabetes Metab. Res.
Rev. 55, 2153–2156. doi: 10.2337/db06-0358
Frenkel, B., White, W., and Tuckermann, J. (2015). Glucocorticoid-induced
osteoporosis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 872, 179–215. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-
2895-8_8
Fritsch, J. M., Charles, J. B., Bennett, B. S., Jones, M. M., and Eckberg, D. L. (1992).
Short-duration spaceﬂight impairs human carotid baroreceptor-cardiac reﬂex
responses. J. Appl. Physiol. 73, 664–671. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1992.73.2.664
Gaignier, F., Schenten, V., De Carvalho Bittencourt, M., Gauquelin-Koch, G.,
Frippiat, J. P., and Legrand-Frossi, C. (2014). Three weeks of murine hindlimb
unloading induces shifts from B to T and from th to tc splenic lymphocytes
in absence of stress and diﬀerentially reduces cell-speciﬁc mitogenic responses.
PLoS One 9:e92664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092664
Gamallo, A., Villanua, A., Trancho, G., and Fraile, A. (1986). Stress adaptation
and adrenal activity in isolated and crowded rats. Physiol. Behav. 36, 217–221.
doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(86)90006-5
Giral, M., Garcia-Olmo, D. C., and Kramer, K. (2011). Eﬀects of wire-bottom
caging on heart rate, activity and body temperature in telemetry-implanted rats.
Lab. Anim. 45, 247–253. doi: 10.1258/la.2011.010071
Globus, R. K., and Morey-Holton, E. (2016). Hindlimb unloading: rodent analog
for microgravity. J. Appl. Physiol. 120, 1196–1206. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.
00997.2015
Gridley, D. S., Mao, X. W., Stodieck, L. S., Ferguson, V. L., Bateman, T. A.,
Moldovan, M., et al. (2013). Changes in mouse thymus and spleen after return
from the STS-135 mission in space. PLoS One 8:e75097. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0075097
Gridley, D. S., Nelson, G. A., Peters, L. L., Kostenuik, P. J., Bateman, T. A., Morony,
S., et al. (2003). Genetic models in applied physiology: selected contribution:
eﬀects of spaceﬂight on immunity in the C57BL/6 mouse. II. Activation,
cytokines, erythrocytes, and platelets. J. Appl. Physiol. 94, 2095–2103. doi: 10.
1152/japplphysiol.01053.2002
Gridley, D. S., Slater, J. M., Luo-Owen, X., Rizvi, A., Chapes, S. K., Stodieck, L. S.,
et al. (2009). Spaceﬂight eﬀects on T lymphocyte distribution, function and gene
expression. J. Appl. Physiol. 106, 194–202. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.91126.2008
Haida, N., Fowler, W. M. Jr., Abresch, R. T., Larson, D. B., Sharman, R. B., Taylor,
R. G., et al. (1989). Eﬀect of hind-limb suspension on young and adult skeletal
muscle. I. normal mice. Exp. Neurol. 103, 68–76. doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(89)
90187-8
Harvey,
A.
C.
(1976).
Estimating
regression
models
with
multiplicative
heteroscedasticity. Econometrica 44, 461–465. doi: 10.2307/1913974
Huang, Y., Fan, Y., Salanova, M., Yang, X., Sun, L., and Blottner, D. (2018). Eﬀects
of plantar vibration on bone and deep fascia in a rat hindlimb unloading model
of disuse. Front. Physiol. 9:616. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2018.00616
Hughson, R. L., Robertson, A. D., Arbeille, P., Shoemaker, J. K., Rush, J. W.,
Fraser, K. S., et al. (2016). Increased postﬂight carotid artery stiﬀness and
inﬂight insulin resistance resulting from 6-mo spaceﬂight in male and female
astronauts. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 310, H628–H638. doi: 10.1152/
ajpheart.00802.2015
Ieraci, A., Mallei, A., and Popoli, M. (2016). Social isolation stress induces anxious-
depressive-like behavior and alterations of neuroplasticity-related genes in adult
male mice. Neural Plast. 2016:6212983. doi: 10.1155/2016/6212983
Jessop, J. J., and Bayer, B. M. (1989). Time-dependent eﬀects of isolation on
lymphocyte and adrenocortical activity. J. Neuroimmunol. 23, 143–147. doi:
10.1016/0165-5728(89)90033-7
Kaufman, S. (1992). Role of spleen in ANF-induced reduction in plasma volume.
Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 70, 1104–1108. doi: 10.1139/y92-153
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
12
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
Kaufman, S., and Levasseur, J. (2003). Eﬀect of portal hypertension on splenic blood
ﬂow, intrasplenic extravasation and systemic blood pressure. Am. J. Physiol.
Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 284, R1580–R1585. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.00516.
2002
Kaur, I., Simons, E. R., Castro, V. A., Mark Ott, C., and Pierson, D. L. (2004).
Changes in neutrophil functions in astronauts. Brain Behav. Immun. 18, 443–
450. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2003.10.005
Keune, J. A., Branscum, A. J., Iwaniec, U. T., and Turner, R. T. (2015). Eﬀects of
spaceﬂight on bone microarchitecture in the axial and appendicular skeleton in
growing ovariectomized rats. Sci. Rep. 5:18671. doi: 10.1038/srep18671
Kondo, H., Yumoto, K., Alwood, J. S., Mojarrab, R., Wang, A., Almeida, E. A.,
et al. (2010). Oxidative stress and gamma radiation-induced cancellous bone
loss with musculoskeletal disuse. J. Appl. Physiol. 108, 152–161. doi: 10.1152/
japplphysiol.00294.2009
Krause, A. R., Speacht, T. L., Zhang, Y., Lang, C. H., and Donahue, H. J. (2017).
Simulated space radiation sensitizes bone but not muscle to the catabolic eﬀects
of mechanical unloading. PLoS One 12:e0182403. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0182403
Krugel, U., Fischer, J., Bauer, K., Sack, U., and Himmerich, H. (2014). The impact
of social isolation on immunological parameters in rats. Arch. Toxicol. 88,
853–855. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1203-0
Lang, T., LeBlanc, A., Evans, H., Lu, Y., Genant, H., and Yu, A. (2004). Cortical
and trabecular bone mineral loss from the spine and hip in long-duration
spaceﬂight. J. Bone Miner. Res. 19, 1006–1012. doi: 10.1359/JBMR.040307
LeBlanc, A., Lin, C., Shackelford, L., Sinitsyn, V., Evans, H., Belichenko, O., et al.
(2000). Muscle volume, MRI relaxation times (T2), and body composition after
spaceﬂight. J. Appl. Physiol. 89, 2158–2164. doi: 10.1152/jappl.2000.89.6.2158
Lloyd, S. A., Lewis, G. S., Zhang, Y., Paul, E. M., and Donahue, H. J. (2012).
Connexin 43 deﬁciency attenuates loss of trabecular bone and prevents
suppression of cortical bone formation during unloading. J. Bone. Miner. Res.
27, 2359–2372. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1687
Mastorakos, G., Pavlatou, M. G., and Mizamtsidi, M. (2006). The hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal and the hypothalamic- pituitary-gonadal axes interplay.
Pediatr. Endocrinol. Rev. 3(Suppl. 1), 172–181.
Matsuda, S., Tohyama, S., and Mizutani, A. (2018). Sex diﬀerences in the eﬀects of
adult short-term isolation rearing on contextual fear memory and extinction.
Neurosci. Lett. 687, 119–123. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2018.09.030
Maurel, D. B., Duan, P., Farr, J., Cheng, A. L., Johnson, M. L., and Bonewald,
L. F. (2016). Beta-catenin haplo insuﬃcient male mice do not lose bone in
response to hindlimb unloading. PLoS One 11:e0158381. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0158381
McLean, S., Grayson, B., Harris, M., Protheroe, C., Woolley, M., and Neill, J.
(2010). Isolation rearing impairs novel object recognition and attentional set
shifting performance in female rats. J. Psychopharmacol. 24, 57–63. doi: 10.
1177/0269881108093842
Meck, J. V., Reyes, C. J., Perez, S. A., Goldberger, A. L., and Ziegler, M. G. (2001).
Marked exacerbation of orthostatic intolerance after long- vs. short-duration
spaceﬂight in veteran astronauts. Psychosom. Med. 63, 865–873. doi: 10.1097/
00006842-200111000-00003
Mehta, S. K., Laudenslager, M. L., Stowe, R. P., Crucian, B. E., Feiveson, A. H., Sams,
C. F., et al. (2017). Latent virus reactivation in astronauts on the international
space station. NPJ Microgravity 3:11. doi: 10.1038/s41526-017-0015-y
Migeotte, P. F., Prisk, G. K., and Paiva, M. (2003). Microgravity alters respiratory
sinus arrhythmia and short-term heart rate variability in humans. Am. J.
Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 284, H1995–H2006. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00409.
2002
Morey, E. R. (1979). Spaceﬂight and bone turnover: correlation with a new rat
model of weightlessness. BioScience 29, 168–172. doi: 10.2307/1307797
Morey-Holton, E., Globus, R. K., Kaplansky, A., and Durnova, G. (2005). The
hindlimb unloading rat model: literature overview, technique update and
comparison with space ﬂight data. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 10, 7–40. doi: 10.1016/
s1569-2574(05)10002-1
Morey-Holton, E. R., and Globus, R. K. (1998). Hindlimb unloading of growing
rats: a model for predicting skeletal changes during space ﬂight. Bone 22(5
Suppl.), 83S–88S. doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(98)00019-2
Morey-Holton, E. R., and Globus, R. K. (2002). Hindlimb unloading rodent model:
technical aspects. J. Appl. Physiol. 92, 1367–1377. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.
00969.2001
Morey-Holton, E. R., Halloran, B. P., Garetto, L. P., and Doty, S. B. (2000). Animal
housing inﬂuences the response of bone to spaceﬂight in juvenile rats. J. Appl.
Physiol. 88, 1303–1309. doi: 10.1152/jappl.2000.88.4.1303
Mortreux, M., Nagy, J. A., Ko, F. C., Bouxsein, M. L., and Rutkove, S. B. (2018). A
novel partial gravity ground-based analog for rats via quadrupedal unloading.
J. Appl. Physiol. 125, 175–182. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01083.2017
Morukov, B., Rykova, M., Antropova, E., Berendeeva, T., Ponomaryov, S., and
Larina, I. (2011). T-cell immunity and cytokine production in cosmonauts
after long-duration space ﬂights. Acta Astronaut. 68, 739–746. doi: 10.1016/
j.actaastro.2010.08.036
Musacchia, X. J., Steﬀen, J. M., and Deavers, D. R. (1983). Rat hindlimb muscle
responses to suspension hypokinesia/hypodynamia. Aviat. Space Environ. Med.
54, 1015–1020.
National Research Council (U.S.) Committee for the Update of the Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, Institute for Laboratory Animal Research
(U.S.), and National Academies Press (U.S.) (2011). Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 220.
Panaroni, C., Fulzele, K., Saini, V., Chubb, R., Pajevic, P. D., and Wu, J. Y. (2015).
PTH signaling in osteoprogenitors is essential for B-lymphocyte diﬀerentiation
and mobilization. J. Bone. Miner. Res. 30, 2273–2286. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2581
Paul, A. M., Acharya, D., Duty, L., Thompson, E. A., Le, L., Stokic, D. S., et al.
(2017). Osteopontin facilitates west nile virus neuroinvasion via neutrophil
“Trojan horse” transport. Sci. Rep. 7:4722. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-04839-7
Pierson, D. L., Stowe, R. P., Phillips, T. M., Lugg, D. J., and Mehta, S. K. (2005).
Epstein-Barr virus shedding by astronauts during space ﬂight. Brain Behav.
Immun. 19, 235–242. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2004.08.001
Pivkin, I. V., Peng, Z., Karniadakis, G. E., Buﬀet, P. A., Dao, M., and Suresh, S.
(2016). Biomechanics of red blood cells in human spleen and consequences
for physiology and disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 7804–7809. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1606751113
Reeb-Whitaker, C. K., Paigen, B., Beamer, W. G., Bronson, R. T., Churchill, G. A.,
Schweitzer, I. B., et al. (2001). The impact of reduced frequency of cage changes
on the health of mice housed in ventilated cages. Lab. Anim. 35, 58–73. doi:
10.1258/0023677011911381
Rettig, T. A., Bye, B. A., Nishiyama, N. C., Hlavacek, S., Ward, C., Pecaut, M. J.,
et al. (2019). Eﬀects of skeletal unloading on the antibody repertoire of tetanus
toxoid and/or CpG treated C57BL/6J mice. PLoS One 14:e0210284. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0210284
Roggia, C., Gao, Y., Cenci, S., Weitzmann, M. N., Toraldo, G., Isaia, G., et al. (2001).
Up-regulation of TNF-producing T cells in the bone marrow: a key mechanism
by which estrogen deﬁciency induces bone loss in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 98, 13960–13965. doi: 10.1073/pnas.251534698
Ronchi, J. A., Figueira, T. R., Ravagnani, F. G., Oliveira, H. C., Vercesi, A. E., and
Castilho, R. F. (2013). A spontaneous mutation in the nicotinamide nucleotide
transhydrogenase gene of C57BL/6J mice results in mitochondrial redox
abnormalities. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 63, 446–456. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.
2013.05.049
Ros-Simo, C., and Valverde, O. (2012). Early-life social experiences in
mice aﬀect emotional behaviour and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
function. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 102, 434–441. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2012.
06.001
Sankaran, J. S., Varshney, M., and Judex, S. (2017). Diﬀerences in bone structure
and unloading-induced bone loss between C57BL/6N and C57BL/6J mice.
Mamm. Genome 28, 476–486. doi: 10.1007/s00335-017-9717-4
Sanzari, J. K., Romero-Weaver, A. L., James, G., Krigsfeld, G., Lin, L., Diﬀenderfer,
E. S., et al. (2013). Leukocyte activity is altered in a ground based murine
model of microgravity and proton radiation exposure. PLoS One 8:e71757.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071757
Schmitt, D. A., and Schaﬀar, L. (1993). Isolation and conﬁnement as a model for
spaceﬂight immune changes. J. Leukoc. Biol. 54, 209–213. doi: 10.1002/jlb.54.
3.209
Schriner, S. E., Linford, N. J., Martin, G. M., Treuting, P., Ogburn, C. E.,
Emond, M., et al. (2005). Extension of murine life span by overexpression of
catalase targeted to mitochondria. Science 308, 1909–1911. doi: 10.1126/science.
1106653
Shahnazari, M., Kurimoto, P., Boudignon, B. M., Orwoll, B. E., Bikle, D. D., and
Halloran, B. P. (2012). Simulated spaceﬂight produces a rapid and sustained
loss of osteoprogenitors and an acute but transitory rise of osteoclast precursors
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
13
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147

Tahimic et al.
Social Isolation During Hindlimb Unloading
in two genetic strains of mice. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 303, E1354–
E1362. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00330.2012
Shanks, N., Renton, C., Zalcman, S., and Anisman, H. (1994). Inﬂuence of change
from grouped to individual housing on a T-cell-dependent immune response
in mice: antagonism by diazepam. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 47, 497–502.
doi: 10.1016/0091-3057(94)90150-3
Shetty, R. A., and Sadananda, M. (2017). Brief social isolation in the adolescent
Wistar-Kyoto rat model of endogenous depression alters corticosterone and
regional monoamine concentrations. Neurochem. Res. 42, 1470–1477. doi: 10.
1007/s11064-017-2203-2
Spani, D., Arras, M., Konig, B., and Rulicke, T. (2003). Higher heart rate of
laboratory mice housed individually vs in pairs. Lab. Anim. 37, 54–62. doi:
10.1258/002367703762226692
Steﬀen, J. M., and Musacchia, X. J. (1986). Spaceﬂight eﬀects on adult rat muscle
protein, nucleic acids, and amino acids. Am. J. Physiol. 251(6 Pt 2), R1059–
R1063. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1986.251.6.R1059
Stowe, R. P., Sams, C. F., and Pierson, D. L. (2003). Eﬀects of mission duration
on neuroimmune responses in astronauts. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 74,
1281–1284.
Stowe, R. P., Sams, C. F., and Pierson, D. L. (2011). Adrenocortical and immune
responses following short- and long-duration spaceﬂight. Aviat. Space Environ.
Med. 82, 627–634. doi: 10.3357/asem.2980.2011
Sullivan, J. L., Ochs, H. D., Schiﬀman, G., Hammerschlag, M. R., Miser, J.,
Vichinsky, E., et al. (1978). Immune response after splenectomy. Lancet 1,
178–181. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(78)90612-8
Sultanian, R., Deng, Y., and Kaufman, S. (2001). Atrial natriuretic factor
increases
splenic
microvascular
pressure
and
ﬂuid
extravasation
in
the rat. J. Physiol. 533(Pt 1), 273–280. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2001.
0273b.x
Thornton, W. E., Moore, T. P., and Pool, S. L. (1987). Fluid shifts in weightlessness.
Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 58(9 Pt 2), A86–A90.
Tou, J. C., Arnaud, S. B., Grindeland, R., and Wade, C. (2005). The eﬀect
of puriﬁed compared with nonpuriﬁed diet on bone changes induced by
hindlimb suspension of female rats. Exp. Biol. Med. 230, 31–39. doi: 10.1177/
153537020523000104
Tou, J. C., Grindeland, R. E., and Wade, C. E. (2004). Eﬀects of diet and
exposure to hindlimb suspension on estrous cycling in Sprague-Dawley rats.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 286, E425–E433. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00287.
2003
Tsvirkun, D., Bourreau, J., Mieuset, A., Garo, F., Vinogradova, O., Larina, I., et al.
(2012). Contribution of social isolation, restraint, and hindlimb unloading to
changes in hemodynamic parameters and motion activity in rats. PLoS One
7:e39923. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039923
Turner, R. T., Evans, G. L., Cavolina, J. M., Halloran, B., and Morey-
Holton, E. (1998). Programmed administration of parathyroid hormone
increases bone formation and reduces bone loss in hindlimb-unloaded
ovariectomized rats. Endocrinology 139, 4086–4091. doi: 10.1210/endo.139.10.
6227
Voorhees, J. L., Powell, N. D., Moldovan, L., Mo, X., Eubank, T. D., and
Marsh, C. B. (2013). Chronic restraint stress upregulates erythropoiesis through
glucocorticoid stimulation. PLoS One 8:e77935. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0077935
Vorobiev, D., Maillet, A., Fortrat, J. O., Pastushkova, L., Allevard, A. M., Sigaudo,
D., et al. (1995). Blood volume regulating hormones, ﬂuid and electrolyte
modiﬁcations during 21 and 198-day space ﬂights (Altair-MIR 1993). Acta
Astronaut. 36, 733–742. doi: 10.1016/0094-5765(95)00164-6
Wagner, E. B., Granzella, N. P., Saito, H., Newman, D. J., Young, L. R., and
Bouxsein, M. L. (2010). Partial weight suspension: a novel murine model for
investigating adaptation to reduced musculoskeletal loading. J. Appl. Physiol.
109, 350–357. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00014.2009
Wang, K. X., Shi, Y., and Denhardt, D. T. (2007). Osteopontin regulates hindlimb-
unloading-induced lymphoid organ atrophy and weight loss by modulating
corticosteroid production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 14777–14782. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0703236104
Wei, L. X., Zhou, J. N., Roberts, A. I., and Shi, Y. F. (2003). Lymphocyte reduction
induced by hindlimb unloading: distinct mechanisms in the spleen and thymus.
Cell Res. 13, 465–471. doi: 10.1038/sj.cr.7290189
Westenbroek, C., Snijders, T. A., den Boer, J. A., Gerrits, M., Fokkema, D. S., and
Ter Horst, G. J. (2005). Pair-housing of male and female rats during chronic
stress exposure results in gender-speciﬁc behavioral responses. Horm. Behav.
47, 620–628. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2005.01.004
Wronski, T. J., and Morey, E. R. (1982). Skeletal abnormalities in rats induced by
simulated weightlessness. Metab. Bone Dis. Relat. Res. 4, 69–75. doi: 10.1016/
0221-8747(82)90011-x
Wronski, T. J., and Morey-Holton, E. R. (1987). Skeletal response to simulated
weightlessness: a comparison of suspension techniques. Aviat. Space Environ.
Med. 58, 63–68.
Wu, W., Yamaura, T., Murakami, K., Murata, J., Matsumoto, K., Watanabe, H.,
et al. (2000). Social isolation stress enhanced liver metastasis of murine colon
26-L5 carcinoma cells by suppressing immune responses in mice. Life Sci. 66,
1827–1838. doi: 10.1016/s0024-3205(00)00506-3
Yamamoto, N., Otsuka, K., Kubo, Y., Hayashi, M., Mizuno, K., Ohshima, H.,
et al. (2015). Eﬀects of long-term microgravity exposure in space on circadian
rhythms of heart rate variability. Chronobiol. Int. 32, 327–340. doi: 10.3109/
07420528.2014.979940
Zhang, L. F., and Hargens, A. R. (2018). Spaceﬂight-induced intracranial
hypertension and visual impairment: pathophysiology and countermeasures.
Physiol. Rev. 98, 59–87. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00017.2016
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Tahimic, Paul, Schreurs, Torres, Rubinstein, Steczina, Lowe,
Bhattacharya, Alwood, Ronca and Globus. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Physiology | www.frontiersin.org
14
September 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 1147
