npj | microgravity
Brief communication
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Inspiration4 data access through the
NASA Open Science Data Repository
Check for updates
Lauren M. Sanders
1,2, Kirill A. Grigorev1,2, Ryan T. Scott
1,3, Amanda M. Saravia-Butler1,3,
San-huei Lai Polo
1,3, Rachel Gilbert
1,3, Eliah G. Overbey
4,5,6, JangKeun Kim
4,5,
Christopher E. Mason
4,5,7 & Sylvain V. Costes
1
The increasing accessibility of commercial and private space travel necessitates a profound
understanding of its impact on human health. The NASA Open Science Data Repository (OSDR)
provides transparent and FAIR access to biological studies, notably the SpaceX Inspiration4 (I4)
mission, which amassed extensive data from civilian astronauts. This dataset encompasses omics
and clinical assays, facilitating comprehensive research on space-induced biological responses.
These data allow for multi-modal, longitudinal assessments, bridging the gap between human and
model organism studies. Crucially, community-driven data standards established by NASA’s OSDR
Analysis Working Groups empower artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning to glean invaluable
insights, guiding future mission planning and health risk mitigation. This article presents a concise
guide to access and analyze I4 data in OSDR, including programmatic access through GLOpenAPI.
This pioneering effort establishes a precedent for post-mission health monitoring programs within
space agencies, propelling research in the burgeoning ﬁeld of commercial space travel’s impact on
human physiology.
The increased accessibility of commercial and private spaceﬂight travel has
made it imperative to understand the short- and long-term effects of space
stressors on human health. The NASA Open Science Data Repository
(OSDR)1–3providesopenandFAIR4accesstospaceﬂightandspace-relevant
biological studies from the past decades. Research enabled by OSDR data
has revealed a complex network of molecular and physiological effects of
spaceﬂight across living systems, from microbes to plants to mammals
(https://osdr.nasa.gov/bio/data/publications.html). Most prior research
using OSDR data has focused on model organisms such as rodents, worms,
and fruit ﬂies. These valuable measurements provide insight into the
response of neuromuscular, immune, and developmental biosystems to the
stressors and hazards of spaceﬂight. Integrating human in vivo data takes
these studies one step further and map previously characterized model
organisms’ biological responses to the limited knowledge on human phy-
siology in space.
The 2021 SpaceX Inspiration4 (I4) mission collected a com-
prehensive atlas of biological measurements from four civilian
astronauts, providing a wealth of data to characterize the effects of
spaceﬂight on the human body. In the current special Nature package
titled “The Second Space Age: Omics, Platforms, and Medicine
Across Orbits,” a wide battery of analyses of these data have already
provided valuable insights (Mason et al., Nature. 2023).
The I4 mission stands as a signiﬁcant milestone,amassing an extensive
collection of biological measurements from four civilian astronauts, thereby
adding an invaluable series of datasets for deciphering the repercussions of
spaceﬂight on human health. The open access of these datasets in the NASA
OSDR provides a unique opportunity for the scientiﬁc community, citizen
scientists, researchers, and students to continue using OSDR resources to
further unlock profound insights into the consequences of space travel on
the human body. In this short article, we guide the readers on how to best
conduct future analysis by presenting a series of vignettes illustrating
pathways for accessing metadata and data from this rich resource through
OSDR. We hope these guidelines will help the community contribute fur-
therto the vast compendium of ﬁndings already published from OSDR data
and enable new hypotheses to be tested with both the human and model
organism data.
1Space Biosciences Research Branch, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 2Blue Marble Space, Seattle, WA, USA. 3KBR, Houston, TX, USA.
4Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 5The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for
Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 6Center for STEM, University of Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 7The WorldQuant Initiative for
Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
e-mail: sylvain.v.costes@nasa.gov
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

Compared to traditional model organisms used for research, one
unique aspect of these data is the breadth of longitudinal measurements
available from several human astronauts. Such temporal information for
several individuals is unprecedented and pushes further the well-known
“NASA’s Twin Study”5 where a single astronaut was monitored over
340 days on the international space station, referred to as a “N of 1”
experiment. In contrast, even though the duration of the I4 mission was
much shorter (3 days), it was at a higher altitude (590 km vs. 420 km), and
since it featured four individuals monitored with such biological depth, the
data opens the door to new and innovative follow-up studies (e.g. Polaris
Dawn missions).
Incorporating environmental data with microbiome data and a wide
variety of phenotypic and high-throughput sequencing assays provides a
rare opportunity for multi-modal, longitudinal assessment of short-term
and long-term spaceﬂight effects on humans. These datasets also provide a
much-needed abilityto compare human spaceﬂight effects to the previously
characterized spaceﬂight consequences in model organisms.
The analyses conducted thus far on the I4 mission’s data have already
yielded substantial revelations, shedding light on the intricate interplay
between space stressors and the immune system, cell-speciﬁc responses to
spaceﬂight, rapid microbial interchange of the crew, and detailed maps of
the changes in the skin from astronauts (Overbey et al., Nature 2023;
Tierney et al., Nature Microbiology 2023; Kim et al., Nature 2023). These
analyses demonstrate the great potential of these data for future knowledge.
The inclusion of multi-modal data, suchas the blood datasets, which cover a
diverse array of measurements (OSD-569, −570, −571, −575), also pre-
sents an exciting avenue for future exploration. This broader scope for
analysis could unveil deeper connections between different biological
responses and offer a more comprehensive understanding of the body’s
adaptations to the space environment. Combining omics and medical assay
dataistheﬁrststeptounderstandingthebiologicalsigniﬁcanceofintegrated
ﬁndings. Translating them into actionable insights for space health will be
our next step, which remains challenging but, for the ﬁrst time, attainable.
Looking ahead, integrating artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning
(AI/ML) in the analysis of biomedical data from the I4 mission also holds
great promise. With all OSDR data accessible in a cloud-based public
repository, standardized metadata, and a robust API query system, this
effort demonstrates AI readiness and empowers our user community to
explore beyond current ﬁndings. The sheer volume and complexity of the
data call for advanced computational approaches that can uncoverpatterns,
correlations, and anomalies that might otherwise remain hidden. Powerful
techniques, such as machine learning and deep learning, hold the potential
to extractmeaningful but complex insights from the vast dataset, facilitating
the identiﬁcation of subtle trends and potential health risks associated with
space travel. NASA OSDR’s commitment to FAIR practices ensures that
researchers across the globe can harness the power of AI to conduct cutting-
edgeanalyses, fostering collaborationand accelerating the pace of discovery.
Finally, this work sets a precedent for space agencies to establish compre-
hensive, post-mission health monitoring programs, incorporating omics
and medical assay data, while informing future mission planning and health
risk mitigation strategies.
Methods
In the realm of scientiﬁc inquiry involving I4 data, it is imperative to note
that publicly accessible information pertains solely to processed data, given
that raw data pertaining to individual human subjects, encompassing
genetic sequence data among other facets, necessitate an application pro-
cedure that mandates approval from an ethical oversight board for access.
The protocol for controlled data access has been meticulously devised,
drawing inspiration from established guidelines within the Database of
Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGAP) and incorporating best practices
derived from the United Kingdom Biobank. This comprehensive frame-
work encompasses an expansive array of data and sample categories, as
illustrated in Fig. 1.
These data are captured across eight studies, delineated by tissue and
sample type, and includes omics assays such as direct RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq), single nuclei ATAC-seq and RNA-seq, metagenomics/meta-
transcriptomics, spatial transcriptomics, and proteomics to comprehensive
metabolic and immune panels. Moreover, clinical assays for blood proﬁling,
suchascompletebloodcount(CBC)andmetabolicpanels,arealsoincluded
in the data resource.
All subjects were consented at an informed consent brieﬁng (ICB) at
SpaceX (Hawthorne, CA), and samples were collected and processed under
the approval of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Weill Cornell
Medicine, under Protocol 21-05023569. All crew members have consented
for data and sample sharing.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data records
For illustration purposes, a single dataset will be used as an example
for researcher access of I4 data from OSDR: OSD-572, which holds
Fig. 1 | Overview of available I4 data in OSDR across 10 studies separated by
tissue. I4 mission data are separated into 10 OSD studies based on sample/tissue type
as shown above. For each OSD, the associated omics and non-omics data are listed
under the GLDS-ID (light gray) and LSDS-ID (dark gray), respectively. The time
points samples were collected for each OSD are color-coded in the I4 mission
timeline at the top. L Launch, F Flight, R Return, d Days.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Brief communication
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
2

metagenomics and metatranscriptomics data from crew skin samples
collected to assess the response of microbial populations (skin, oral,
nasal) to spaceﬂight. Samples were collected at three timepoints pre-
ﬂight (launch minus 92 days (L-92), L-44, and L-3), mid-ﬂight for
three time points (ﬂight day 1 (FD1), FD2, FD3), and post-ﬂight
(return plus 1 day (R + 1), R + 45 R + 82).
The OSDR study page (https://osdr.nasa.gov/bio/repo/data/studies/
OSD-572) contains several sections with information about the study,
including a description of the experiment that gave rise to the data, asso-
ciated experiments, payloads, and missions, and a section detailing each
experimental or analytical protocol involved in generating the dataset. A
“publications” section also lists all published papers associated with
this study.
Figure 2 shows snapshots of the repository, emphasizing the metadata
tables available for OSD-572. The Samples table (Fig. 2a) contains metadata
information on each sample, including intrinsic characteristics of the
sample (e.g., host organism, material type) as well as factor values relating to
the experiment (e.g., spaceﬂight status, time collected). The Assays table
contains metadata information for each sample pertaining to the assay
speciﬁed in the drop-down menu (Fig. 2b). Users can choose a speciﬁc assay
to display from the drop-down menu, and the assay table will update
accordingly.
Bothmetadata tablescanbedownloaded asacomma-separated-values
(CSV) ﬁle with user-selected columns to aid downstream analyses. Sample
names map across metadata and data ﬁelds to enable targeted selection of
speciﬁc samples or differential analysis across groups.
Figure 3 shows the raw and processed data ﬁlesavailable tobrowse and
download through the OSDR study page for OSD-630. All OSDR datasets
use the ISA-Tab (Investigation, Study, Assay) metadata model6 to capture
experimental metadata for each study. Under the “Study Metadata Files”
folder,userscandownloadthe*ISA.zipﬁleforthestudy,whichcontainsthe
ISA-Tab ﬁles that hold all study information displayed on OSDR, to enable
furthercharacterizationof the dataset (Fig. 3a).Investigator-submitteddata,
both raw and processed, can be found under “Metagenomics Data Files”.
This folder houses raw FASTQ sequences, which are essentially the
sequence ﬁles post-removal of human-read data (see Fig. 3b for visual
representation).
Furthermore, GeneLab, an integral component of the Open Science
Data Repository (OSDR), has devised standardized omics data proces-
sing pipelines. These pipelines are instrumental in generating and dis-
seminating processed data outputs for all omics datasets. They
incorporate a rigorous quality control assessment process, including
tools such as FastQC and MultiQC, particularly tailored for sequencing
data analysis (refer to Fig. 3c, d for an illustrative depiction).
Fig. 2 | Sample and assay metadata available in OSDR for I4 study OSD-572. a Sample metadata table contains sample level information regarding sample characteristics
and experimental factors. b Assay metadata table contains information about each assay on a per sample level.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Brief communication
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
3

Moreover,itisnoteworthythattheOSDRencompassesadiversearrayof
physiological and phenotypic data types, spanning cytokine panels, complete
blood counts, imaging data, ultrasonography records, and more. These data
types are subject to stringent data and metadata standards, complemented by
tabular data transformation protocols. This meticulous approach is designed
to uphold data quality and foster data reuse. Importantly, these physio-
phenotypicstandardshavebeendevelopedandreviewedincollaborationwith
subject matter experts who specialize in the respective assays, forming an
integral part of the OSDR Analysis Working Groups (AWG).
Usage notes
These data, like any other datasets deposited into the OSDR reposi-
tory, can be programmatically accessed through GLOpenAPI
(https://visualization.genelab.nasa.gov/GLOpenAPI/).
Here,
we
provide a quick example of running a differential expression analysis
and pathway enrichment visualization in R (https://www.R-project.
org/) using the unnormalized counts data associated with study OSD-
569 (whole blood direct RNA-seq data).
However, please note that unlike most other datasets, access to human
RNA-Seq data requires authentication with sufﬁcient credentials, which
may be made available upon request. I.e. while normally one would simply
use the read.csv() function, for these data, we will deﬁne a get.csv() function
that passes the authentication token in the header of the request; we assume
the token is stored in a variable called “TOKEN”:
library(httr)
get.csv = function (url, …) {
auth = paste("Bearer", TOKEN)
response
=
GET(url,
add_headers(Authorization=
auth))
return(read.csv(text=content(response), …))
}
Metadata
Since dataset OSD-569 is of interest, a query component “id=OSD-
569” should be passed, and to retrieve all factor value metadata, a
component “study.factor value” is added. Sample names and factors
are columns in the metadata table. The header of the metadata table
consists of two lines, and the ﬁrst one may be skipped in many cases
(see the GLOpenAPI manual for full explanation). The sample name is
always the 3rd column (after “accession” and “assay name”), but, for
illustrative purposes, here, we read everything as regular columns and
assign row names manually in a later step. The request is sent to the
GLOpenAPI “metadata” endpoint:
GLOPENAPI
=
"https://visualization.genelab.nasa.
gov/GLOpenAPI/"
query = URLencode("id=OSD-569&study.factor value")
url = paste0(API, "metadata/?", query)
metadata = get.csv(url, skip=1)
cat("Metadata column names:\n")
print(colnames(metadata))
Output:
Metadata column names:
[1] "X.accession" "assay.name"
[3] "sample.name" "subject"
[5] "timestamp"
Data
The same query component is included to retrieve data for OSD-569
(“id=OSD-569”). For differential expression analyses, data from ﬁles con-
taining unnormalized RNA-Seq counts is requested (component “ﬁle.da-
tatype=unnormalizedcounts”);therequestissenttotheGLOpenAPI“data”
endpoint.
Fig. 3 | Data available for browse and download in OSDR for I4 study OSD-630.
a Study metadata ﬁles include ISA-Tab ﬁles. b Investigator-deposited data ﬁles
include the Metagenomics Data Files containing (human-read removed) raw
FASTQ sequence data ﬁles and any investigator processed data ﬁles. c GeneLab
Processed Metagenomics Files include a number of quality control outputs,
including the FASTQC Outputs with a raw MultiQC report, and will contain
GeneLab processed data ﬁles. d Examples of MultiQC data available for OSD-630.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Brief communication
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
4

As it is common for differential expression analyses, sample names
are column names in the data table, and gene names are row names.
Gene names always come ﬁrst, so we pass “row.names=1” to the get.csv()
function.
The header of the data table consists of three lines (accession, assay
name, sample name), but as we are working with a single assay, we can skip
the ﬁrst two lines:
q = "id=OSD-569&ﬁle.datatype=unnormalized counts"
url = paste0(GLOPENAPI, "data/?", URLencode(q))
data = get.csv(
url, check.names=F, skip=2, row.names=1
)
Differential expression and pathway enrichment analysis
At this point, the data is ready to be ingested into standard analysis
tools, for example, DESeq27and fgsea8 with the use of MSigDb9
pathways. For DESeq2, sample names in the metadata should be
represented as row names; and if, for example, we want to classify all
timestamps into “preﬂight” (anything before launch, i.e. timestamps
starting with “L-“), “postﬂight” (immediately after landing, “R+1”)
and “recovery” (all other timestamps starting with “R+“), we also add
a “status” column:
rownames(metadata) = metadata$sample.name
metadata$status = sapply(metadata$timestamp,
function (t) {
ifelse(t=="R+1", "postﬂight",
ifelse(startsWith(t, "R+"), "recovery",
"preﬂight"))
})
Finally, we run the analyses and visualize enrichment of a particular
MSigDb
pathway
(DIAZ_CHRONIC_MYELOGENOUS_LEUKE-
MIA_UP) with result displayed in Fig. 4:
library(DESeq2)
dds = DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(
round(na.omit(data)), # DESeq2 requires integer
values and absence of NaNs
metadata, ~status+subject,
)
lrt = DESeq(dds, test="LRT", reduced=~subject)
deg = results(lrt, contrast=c("status",
"postﬂight", "preﬂight"))
library(msigdbr)
C2 = msigdbr(species="human", category="C2")
pathways = split(x=C2$ensembl_gene, f=C2$gs_name)
library(fgsea)
deg$rank = deg$padj * sign(deg$log2FoldChange)
ranks = with(na.omit(deg),
setNames(rank, rownames(na.omit(deg))))
plotEnrichment(pathways$DIAZ_CHRONIC_MYELOGENOUS_
LEUKEMIA_UP, ranks)
Technical validation
The establishment of standardized data formats, uniform units of mea-
surement, ontological frameworks, and comprehensive metadata ﬁelds is
imperative to ensure the seamless integration of new data types into a
repository and to enhance the capacity for cross-study biological analyses.
Further, the integration of medical assays with multi-omics data, including
Fig. 4 | Enrichment analysis. Enrichment of the DIAZ_CHRONIC_MYELOGENOUS_LEUKEMIA_UP MSigDb pathway in the RNA-Seq data associated with dataset
OSD-569 at the postﬂight timestamp compared to preﬂight conditions, analyzed and visualized from data retrieved via GLOpenAPI.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Brief communication
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
5

genomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and other data modalities, facilitates
meta-analyses geared towards better understanding of the human response
to the space environment. The correlation between omicsdata and clinically
signiﬁcant endpoints derived from medical data holds paramount sig-
niﬁcance in elucidating health implications. Nonetheless, the integration of
disparate data types remains a persistent challenge in the biomedical
research domain, exacerbated by inconsistencies across laboratories and
studies, as well as inherent variability in individual responses. Moreover,
space missions like I4, which encompass multiple data collection points
(pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight, post-ﬂight, etc.), provide longitudinal datasets that
enable the intricate yet potent exploration of space-induced responses
over time.
Over the ﬁve years, the OSDR Analysis Working Groups (AWGs)
were convened in order to ensure the reusability and standardization of
data available within OSDR. These AWGs consist of diverse OSDR data
stakeholders, including investigators, commercial entities, academic
researchers, and students. Each AWG is dedicated to a distinct
data category or domain of expertise, including animals, artiﬁcial
intelligence, microbes, multi-omics, phenotypic data, and plants.
Professionals within these AWGs contributed their expertise towards
the formulation of standardized data processing pipelines and the
development of assay metadata conﬁgurations tailored to each new data
type. Consequently, OSDR was well-equipped to receive, curate,
standardize, and process the wide spectrum of medical and omics data
collected during the I4 mission.
Medical data serves as a crucial resource for gaining insights into
biological responses. However, balancing the imperative to protect sensitive
health information of astronauts while enabling data sharing for research
necessitates the robust implementation of privacy and security protocols.
OSDR has introduced an innovative capability, allowing users to access
metadata associated with private medical datasets, albeit without direct
access to the data itself. OSDR’s dedication to comprehensive and unam-
biguous metadata, coupled with the utilization of the GLOpenAPI, under-
scores its readiness for analysis and artiﬁcial intelligence applications. The
data query method illustrated here marks an initial step toward realizing the
goal of Precision Space Health10,11. In cases where users seek to employ
private medical datasets such as those collected on I4 for research purposes,
an application process is in place that mandates approval from an institu-
tional review board (IRB).
Data availability
All data are available on the NASA Open Science Data Repository. OSD-
569, OSD-570, OSD-571, OSD-572, OSD-573, OSD-574, OSD-575, OSD-
630, OSD-656, OSD-687:
Code availability
GeneLab processed data is generated using the pipelines that are publicly
availableontheGeneLabDataProcessingGitHubpage:https://github.com/
nasa/GeneLab_Data_Processing.
Received: 14 December 2023; Accepted: 3 April 2024;
References
1.
Berrios, D. C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S. & Costes, S. V.
NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics data.
Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D1515–D1522 (2021).
2.
Scott, R. T. et al. Advancing the integration of biosciences data
sharing to further enable space exploration. Cell Rep. 33,
108441 (2020).
3.
Ray, S. et al. GeneLab: Omics database for spaceﬂight experiments.
Bioinformatics 35, 1753–1759 (2019).
4.
Berrios, D. C., Beheshti, A. & Costes, S. V. FAIRness and usability for
open-access Omics data systems. AMIA Annu. Symp. Proc. 2018,
232–241 (2018).
5.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: A
multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science
364, eaau8650 (2019).
6.
González-Beltrán, A., Maguire, E., Sansone, S.-A. & Rocca-Serra, P.
linkedISA: semantic representation of ISA-Tab experimental
metadata. BMC Bioinforma. 15, S4 (2014).
7.
Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol.
15, 550 (2014).
8.
Korotkevich, G., Sukhov, V. & Sergushichev, A. Fast gene set
enrichment analysis. bioRxiv 060012 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1101/
060012.
9.
Castanza, A. S. et al. Extending support for mouse data in the
Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB). Nat. Methods 20,
1619–1620 (2023).
10. Scott, R. T. et al. Biomonitoring and precision health in deep space
supported by artiﬁcial intelligence. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5,
196–207 (2023).
11. Morris, J. H. et al. The scalable precision medicine open knowledge
engine (SPOKE): a massive knowledge graph of biomedical
information. Bioinformatics 39, btad080 (2023).
Acknowledgements
OSDR is funded by the NASA Space Biology Program, part of the NASA
Biological and Physical Sciences Division within the NASA Science
Mission Directorate; non-omics data are also partially supported by the
NASA Human Research Program (HRP). C.E.M. thanks WorldQuant,
the GI Research Foundation, NASA (NNX14AH50G, NNX17AB26G,
NNH18ZTT001N-FG2, 80NSSC22K0254, 80NSSC23K0832), the
National Institutes of Health (R01MH117406), and the LLS (MCL7001-
18, LLS 9238-16, 7029-23). J.K. was supported by Basic Science
Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (RS-2023-00241586). J.K.
acknowledges Boryung for their ﬁnancial support and research
enhancement ground, provided through their Global Space Healthcare
Initiative, Humans In Space, including mentorship and access to
relevant expert networks.
Author contributions
Study design: S.V.C., L.M.S. and K.A.G. wrote the main manuscript. R.T.S.,
A.M.S.-B., E.O., J.K., and C.E.M. provided ﬁgures and expert review. All
authors reviewed the ﬁnal manuscript.
Competing interests
CEM is a co-Founder of Onegevity, Twin Orbit, and Cosmica Biosciences.
All other authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Sylvain V. Costes.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Brief communication
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
6

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US;
foreign copyright protection may apply 2024
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00393-5
Brief communication
npj Microgravity |  (2024) 10:56 
7
