REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Interplay of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
and DNA damage response
María Moreno-Villanueva1,2, Michael Wong1,3, Tao Lu1,4, Ye Zhang5 and Honglu Wu1
In space, multiple unique environmental factors, particularly microgravity and space radiation, pose constant threat to the DNA
integrity of living organisms. Speciﬁcally, space radiation can cause damage to DNA directly, through the interaction of charged
particles with the DNA molecules themselves, or indirectly through the production of free radicals. Although organisms have
evolved strategies on Earth to confront such damage, space environmental conditions, especially microgravity, can impact DNA
repair resulting in accumulation of severe DNA lesions. Ultimately these lesions, namely double strand breaks, chromosome
aberrations, micronucleus formation, or mutations, can increase the risk for adverse health effects, such as cancer. How spaceﬂight
factors affect DNA damage and the DNA damage response has been investigated since the early days of the human space program.
Over the years, these experiments have been conducted either in space or using ground-based analogs. This review summarizes
the evidence for DNA damage induction by space radiation and/or microgravity as well as spaceﬂight-related impacts on the DNA
damage response. The review also discusses the conﬂicting results from studies aimed at addressing the question of potential
synergies between microgravity and radiation with regard to DNA damage and cellular repair processes. We conclude that further
experiments need to be performed in the true space environment in order to address this critical question.
npj Microgravity  (2017) 3:14 ; doi:10.1038/s41526-017-0019-7
INTRODUCTION
As humans on Earth, we are well protected from insults originated
in deep space. However, during space travel, all living organisms
are exposed to a number of unique environmental stress factors,
such as space radiation and microgravity. These two factors in
particular have been topics of active investigation as their
potential to compromise human health has not yet been fully
elucidated.
Typically
encountered
beyond
the
reach
of
the
Earth’s
magnetosphere, space radiation refers to galactic cosmic rays
(GCR) and protons released from large solar particle events (SPEs).
GCRs consist of approximately 87% hydrogen ions (protons) and
12% helium ions (alpha particles), with the remaining 1–2% of
particles being high atomic number and energy nuclei.1 In low
Earth orbit (LEO), astronauts are exposed mostly to protons
trapped in Earth’s geomagnetic ﬁeld, and some high energy GCR
and SPE particles that are able to penetrate to LEO. In fact, the
energy of some GCR particles is so high that it is difﬁcult to shield
from them at all using conventional materials,2 making exposure
inside spacecraft inevitable. Notable effects of this space radiation
in humans include, for instance, light ﬂashes from retinal exposure
to charged particles,3 reported during astronauts’ trips to the
Moon4 and in Skylab missions,5 and the early onset of cataracts.6
Apart from direct space radiation effects, indirect damage through
bystander effects, adaptive responses, and genomic instability
may also occur.7
In addition to radiation, in LEO or during transit to the Moon or
Mars, astronauts are exposed to microgravity. As many have noted
before, exposure to the microgravity environment causes a range
of detrimental health effects, including bone loss, cardiovascular
deconditioning, and neurovestibular changes.8,
9 Furthermore,
some of these health effects have been observed in studies using
ground-based analogs that simulate the microgravity condition.10
At the molecular level, radiation and/or microgravity are known
to negatively impact DNA integrity. To counteract DNA damage,
cells have developed speciﬁc mechanisms that locate and repair
DNA lesions. These mechanisms consist of a network of cellular
proteins involved in DNA damage response (DDR) pathways, such
as cell cycle regulation, DNA repair, and apoptosis. Generally, cells
are able to accommodate moderate DNA damage through these
different repair processes; however, space conditions, especially
the lack of gravity may adversely affect the DNA repair process
leading to accumulation of DNA injuries.
Although space radiation and microgravity are two major
environmental stressors encountered in space travel, other space-
related factors can present challenges to DNA integrity as well.
Speciﬁcally, partial gravity experienced on the surface of the Moon
or Mars, psychological stress due to conﬁned space or loneliness
in long duration missions, possible toxic chemical compounds in
the spacecraft, and lunar or Martian regolith inhaled into the lung
might also negatively impact astronauts’ health.
Given the importance of understanding the consequences of
the space environment on human physiology, this review focuses
on the interplay of space radiation and microgravity in the DDR.
Relevant studies addressing the question of potential synergies
between radiation and microgravity are also discussed. Addition-
ally, investigations of DNA damage induced in space are reviewed.
Recent evidence for such effects (Tables 1 and 2) is summarized
below.
Received: 6 September 2016 Revised: 10 March 2017 Accepted: 28 March 2017
1NASA, Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA; 2University of Konstanz, Konstanz 78457, Germany; 3Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA; 4University
of Houston Clear Lake, Houston, TX, USA and 5NASA Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, FL, USA
Correspondence: Honglu Wu (Honglu.wu-1@nasa.gov)
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Table 1.
Summary of results related to residual DNA damage and DDR from experiments conducted in simulated microgravity
Ref.
Environment
Experimental conditions animal/cellular model
DDR
R, μG, R + μG
Residual damage/DNA repair activity
Synergy*
Risin and Pellis18 Simulated microgravity RWV
+ radiation
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were exposed to 137Cs γ rays at a
dose rate of 15 Gy/min.
Inhibition of radiation-induced apoptosis
Yes
Mosesso et al.23
Clinostat + radiation
Human lymphocytes were exposed to 1.5 Gy X-ray.
Increased yield of chromosome aberrations
Yes
Manti et al.24
Simulated microgravity RWV
+ radiation
Human peripheral blood lymphocytes were exposed to 60 MeV
protons or 250 kVp X-rays in the dose range 0–6 Gy, and allowed to
repair DNA damage for 24 h.
No differences in radiation-induced chromosome aberrations
No
Canova et al.25
Simulated microgravit γ RWV
+ radiation
Lymphoblastoid TK6 cells were irradiated with γ rays and incubated
for 24 h. Radiation doses ranged from 1–4 Gy at dose rate of 1 Gy/min
from 60Co γ source.
Higher frequency of micronucleated cells and mutations.
Signiﬁcant reduction in apoptotic cells. Increased number of cells
in G1-phase
Yes
Dang et al.29
Simulated microgravity RWV
+ radiation
Human B lymphoblast cells were exposed to 300 MeV/u carbon ions. Increased apoptosis and ROS
Yes
Mognato et al.26 Simulated microgravity RWV
+ radiation
Human lymphocytes were exposed to X-rays at 2.2 Gy/min or γ from
60Co at 1 Gy/min and incubated for 24 h. Total doses were 1, 2 and 3
Gy.
Increased mutant frequency after radiation
Yes
Mognato28
Simulated microgravity RWV
+ radiation
Human peripheral blood cells were exposed to 137Cs γ rays. The total
dose was 5 Gy and the dose rate was 3.1 Gy/min.
Signiﬁcantly higher number of γ-H2AX foci per nucleus. The
fraction of foci-positive cells decreased slower after irradiation
Yes
Wang et al.22
Simulated microgravity 3D
clinostat + radiation
Embryonic stem cells were exposed to 8 Gy γ rays and incubated for
0, 1 and 2 h post irradiation.
Increased apoptosis. Population growth inhibited.
Yes
Girardi et al.27
Reduced gravitational force
RWV + radiation
Human peripheral lymphocytes were incubated for 4 and 24 h after
0.2 and 2 Gy γ irradiation.
Decreased number of miRNAs in response to radiation exposure Yes
Li et al.30
Tail suspension + radiation
Spermatogenic cells of male Swiss Webster mice were exposed
whole body to 200 MeV/u carbon ions at an entrance dose rate of
0.5 Gy/min.
Increased DNA damage. Increased apoptotic rate and the
expression levels of p53 and Bax
Yes
* Synergy in terms of effect of microgravity on the repair of artiﬁcially induced DNA damage
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Table 2.
Summary of results related to residual DNA damage and DDR from experiments conducted in spaceﬂights
Ref.
Environment
Experimental conditions animal/cellular model
DDR
R, μG, R + μG
Residual damage/DNA repair activity
Synergy*
Bender et al.39
Gemini III mission
Cultured human lymphocytes were exposed to 32Pb particles in space after
reaching the microgravity condition
Chromosomes deletions
Yes
Bender et al.40
Gemini XI mission
Cultured human lymphocytes were exposed to 32Pb particles in space after
reaching the microgravity condition
Chromosomes deletions
No
Horneck et al.45
Spacelab mission IML-2
Frozen E. coli and B. subtilis bacteria and human ﬁbroblasts were exposed to X-
rays and UV before launch. Cells were thawed in space to allow repair in the
microgravity environment.
Re-joining of DNA strand breaks
No
Takahashi et al.43 US Space Shuttle mission (Discovery;
STS-91)
DNA substrate was damaged by restriction enzyme digestion in space
T4 DNA ligase activity
No
Pross et al.47
Radiation exposure on Shuttle
Atlantis ﬂight STS-84
Temperature dependent repair mutant rad54–3 of S. cerevisiae yeast was
irradiated with 63Ni β particles during ﬂight and allowed repair at different
temperatures.
Double strand breaks and survival
No
Ohnishi et al.44
US Space Shuttle mission (Discovery,
STS-91)
Damaged template DNA induced with an alkylating agent (N-methyl-N-nitroso
urea; MNU).
Mutation frequency
No
Ishizaki49
US Space Shuttle mission (STS-95)
Human colon cancer cells were treated with bleomycin in space.
Microsatellite mutation rates
No
Wu et al.51
8-days Space Shuttle mission STS-103 Blood samples collected from an astronaut before and post the Shuttle mission
were exposed to high doses of γ rays.
Chromosomal aberrations
No
Greco et al.37
Missions of different durations on the
MIR and ISS.
Blood samples collected before and post space missions were exposed to
ground-based X-rays.
Chromosome aberration frequency
Yes
Lu et al.50
ISS Expedition 39
Conﬂuent human ﬁbroblasts (G1 phase) were treated with bleomycin in space. γ-H2AX and gene expression
No
* Synergy in terms of effect of microgravity on the repair of artiﬁcially induced DNA damage
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 

A review on data about heavy ion radiobiology or health risks
caused by exposure to space radiation, or the effect of radiation
and/or microgravity at the tissue level (bone/muscle loss) is
beyond the scope of this paper.
SIMULATED MICROGRAVITY STUDIES
DNA damage induced by simulated microgravity
As opportunities for true spaceﬂight experiments are rare, various
studies have been conducted using ground-based devices that
simulate certain aspects of microgravity. Common analogs for
microgravity include rotating wall vessels (RWV), and 2D and 3D
clinostats for cultured cells,11 and the hind limb suspension model
for rodents.12 Other approaches, such as airplanes ﬂying in a
parabolic pattern or free drop towers also offer true microgravity
for a short duration.11 For humans, the bed rest model is used to
simulate the effects of microgravity on various physiological
systems,
especially
for
studies
of
bone,
muscle
and
the
cardiovascular system.10
Using these microgravity analogs, researchers have reported a
range of data concerning the induction of DNA damage by
simulated microgravity. For instance, simulated microgravity has
been reported to induce DNA single strand breaks in human
retinal pigment epithelial cells (hRPE) cultured in RWV. At 48 h
after returning to the 1 g gravity condition, this DNA damage
persisted and the production of the
inﬂammatory
marker
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) increased. However, hRPE cells previously
treated with the anti-inﬂammatory agent cysteine showed less
DNA damage and no PGE2 release.13 The bed rest model for
studying the effect of microgravity on human physiology has also
revealed an increase of 8-oxo-7,8 dihydro-2′ deoxyguanosine (8-
oxo-HdG), which is considered a marker of oxidative DNA
damage.14 Taken together, these results from cell models and
human subjects suggest that various forms of ground-based
microgravity analogs may indeed induce oxidative DNA damage.
Many
studies
that
reported
measurements
of
simulated
microgravity-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS), but not
speciﬁc DNA damage markers, are not included here. Simulated
microgravity alone does not appear to induce double strand
breaks (DSB) in cells with normal genetic background. However,
DSBs were found in mouse embryonic stem cells that were
deﬁcient in DDR and cultured under RWV,15 suggesting that
perhaps some DSB type damage is induced by simulated
microgravity,
but
is
typically
repaired
in
DDR
competent
organisms.
Effects of simulated microgravity on DDR
In addition to the aforementioned DNA damage, there is evidence
indicating that key elements of the DDR machinery are also
affected under simulated microgravity alone.16–18 For instance,
DNA damage, as well as decreased expression of DNA repair
genes involved in mismatch repair, base excision repair, nucleo-
tide excision repair, and the down regulation of p53, was observed
in proliferating lymphocytes grown in simulated microgravity.17
Furthermore, p21 up regulation occurred rapidly in lymphocytes
exposed to real microgravity from parabolic ﬂights and under
simulated microgravity in 2D clinostats, suggesting a p53-
independent mechanism.19 Additionally, the activity of the DNA
strand break sensor poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 signiﬁcantly
increased under simulated microgravity.20, 21 Further studies on
mouse embryonic stem cells cultured in a 3D clinostat showed
that simulated microgravity alone did not induce DNA damage,
but it did affect radiation-induced DNA repair.22
Most of the studies on the effects of simulated microgravity on
the DDR have used low-linear energy transfer (LET) X-rays or γ rays
to generate high levels of DNA damage. These damaged cells
were then allowed to repair under different gravity conditions.
However, our review of the studies performed under this
experimental design has revealed conﬂicting results. For example,
human lymphocytes exposed to 1.5 Gy of X-rays and cultured in a
clinostat showed a higher number of X-ray induced chromosome
aberrations in comparison to control cells cultured under the static
1 g condition.23 But, researchers using the NASA-designed RWV
bioreactor found no signiﬁcant difference in high energy proton
radiation-induced (60 MeV protons or 250kVp X-rays in the dose
ranges of 0–6 Gy) chromosome aberrations between human
lymphocytes cultured in normal vs. simulated microgravity
conditions, indicating that DNA repair was not affected.24 Even
so, more studies do suggest that simulated microgravity has an
effect on DDR. Speciﬁcally, in lymphoblastoid TK6 cells irradiated
with γ rays and incubated for 24 h in a simulated microgravity
environment, a signiﬁcant reduction in apoptotic cells, increased
number of cells in G1-phase, and higher frequencies of micro-
nucleated cells and mutations were reported in comparison to
cells that were exposed to the same doses of radiation while
maintained in 1 g.25 Greater mutant frequency was also found in
human lymphocytes after ionizing radiation exposure in simulated
microgravity.26 In both TK6 cells and peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs), the increase in mutation rate was associated
with a reduced rate of radiation-induced apoptosis, again
indicating a DDR change. Meanwhile, Omics studies such as
transcriptome and microRNome analysis have provided evidence
that simulated microgravity affects the DDR to ionizing radiation
in human PBMCs by causing downregulation of DDR pathways
associated miRNAs like miR-7 and miR-27a.27 Ultimately, simulated
microgravity delayed DNA repair of radiation-induced DSBs in
human lymphocytes, and as a consequence, the genotoxic effects
of ionizing radiation increased.28 It should be noted, however, that
few studies have employed high-LET charged particles to induce
DNA damage under simulated microgravity conditions. In one
such study, simulated microgravity was shown to decrease carbon
ion radiation-induced cell survival and increase apoptosis in
human B lymphoblasts. Such effects of simulated microgravity
were associated with increased heavy ion radiation-induced
intracellular
ROS
generation.29
In
another
study,
increased
apoptosis and DNA damage were found in the sperm of mice
that was exposed simultaneously to carbon ions and simulated
microgravity (Hindlimb suspension).30 Together, these results
suggest that, in most reported studies, simulated microgravity
alters the expression of genes involved in DDR, and indeed affect
the cellular response to radiation-induced damage (Table 1). More
work is needed, however, to better understand the effects of
microgravity on cellular repair processes in response to high LET
radiation-induced DNA damage.
SPACEFLIGHT STUDIES
DNA damage from spaceﬂight
In contrast to the large number of studies that have been
conducted on the ground using particles generated in accel-
erators, results describing DNA damage from direct exposure to
natural space radiation are few. Detection of direct biological
damage by space radiation is challenging not only due to the low
dose and the low dose rate nature of the space environment, but
also due to the possible synergistic effects of microgravity. In one
such attempt, ﬁxed human cervical carcinoma (HeLa) cells were
ﬂown in the Russian MIR space station for 40 days or on the Space
Shuttle for 9 days. The resulting DNA damage levels, as measured
by
enzymatic
incorporation
of
[3 H]-dATP
from
terminal
deoxyribo-nucleotidyl transferase, correlated with space ﬂight
duration,31 suggesting that the measured DNA damage was
caused by space radiation and was dependent on the length of
the space ﬂight. In another experiment, human lymphoblastoid
TK6 cells were sent to the International Space Station (ISS) and
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

kept frozen in space for 134 days so that the damage could
accumulate (while the impact of microgravity was simultaneously
minimized). The cells ﬂown to space showed an increase in
thymidine kinase deﬁcient (TK(-)) mutations over the ground
controls.32 In a similar study, frozen TK6 cells were also analyzed
for DSBs by measuring the phosphorylation of the histone H2AX
(γ-H2AX). The induced DSBs appeared as a dense track of
ionizations and excitations along the particle path.33 Similarly,
during the Foton-M3 Mission (total 12 days), normal human
dermal ﬁbroblasts ﬁxed after 4 days in orbit were found to have
increased DSBs.34 The γ-H2AX assay for detecting DSBs has also
been performed on human ﬁbroblasts cultured at 37 °C on the ISS
for 14 days. Although the average number of γ-H2AX foci was
similar between the ﬂight samples and ground controls, the ﬂown
cells exhibited several track shaped foci that were similar to those
induced by high-LET space radiation analogs on the ground.35
Together, these results suggest that DNA damage can be directly
attributed to the space radiation environment.
Another effect attributed to space radiation is the induction of
chromosome aberrations in white blood cells of astronauts after
returning from space.36 Such damage can be observed only after a
3–6 month duration mission, but not a 2-week shuttle mission.36
Similarly, analysis of chromosomal aberrations in blood cells from
one Italian and eight Russian cosmonauts were analyzed following
missions of different duration on the MIR space station and the
ISS. Although an increase in chromosome damage was observed
in some cases, the authors did not detect a correlation between
ﬂight history and chromosome damage.37
DNA damage induced by spaceﬂight has also been detected
using other biomarkers. At times, however, it has been difﬁcult to
properly isolate the effects of space radiation from other space
environmental factors. For instance, urine samples collected from
astronauts have been analyzed for oxidative DNA damage by
measuring 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) before, during,
and after spaceﬂight missions. 8-OHdG excretion was unchanged
during spaceﬂight but increased after ﬂight.38 The same study
found no changes in 8-OHdG excretion either during or after a
short-duration spaceﬂight,38 suggesting that elevated 8-OHdG
excretion may depend on the length of the mission. Even though
astronauts were exposed to space radiation during the mission,
the radiation level was so low that the oxidative damage was
perhaps caused by microgravity in LEO or hypergravity experi-
enced during re-entry. Due to the limited in vivo space-based
studies, and other factors that may contribute to 8-OHdG changes,
it is evident that further work is needed to understand the
increased 8-OHdG measured in astronauts.
Effects of spaceﬂight on DDR
Potential effects of spaceﬂight on the DDR have been investigated
since the early days of the human space program. Experiments
aimed at addressing such effects have been conducted according
to several experimental scenarios: (i) pre-ﬂight induction of high
levels of DNA damage with radiation prior to launch, (ii) exposing
samples to short-ranged particles in space, or (iii) exposing
samples to radiation shortly after landing. In these studies, the
combined spaceﬂight factors include not only microgravity and
the background space radiation, but also factors, such as
hypergravity experienced during launch or re-entry. The experi-
ments carried out in the Gemini III and the Gemini XI manned
spaceﬂight missions were designed to test synergistic effects
between ionizing radiation and other stress factors associated
with spaceﬂight. During these missions, cultured human lympho-
cytes were exposed to 32Pb particles in space after reaching the
microgravity condition. Chromosomes analysis after Gemini III
mission showed an increased frequency of β-induced deletions
compared to the ground controls, whereas the frequencies of
dicentrics and rings were similar. However, the synergistic effect
observed after Gemini III could not be conﬁrmed after Gemini
XI.39, 40 Early studies on the combined effects of microgravity and
radiation have been reviewed previously by Horneck, and by
Keifer and Pross, who concluded that spaceﬂight does affect the
development of organisms, but argued that the majority of
spaceﬂight experiments showed little effects of microgravity on the
repair of radiation-induced DNA damage.41,
42 More recently,
attempts at understanding the combined effects of space
radiation and microgravity were implemented during the STS-91
Shuttle mission. In the Shuttle experiment, researchers showed no
effect of microgravity on either the biochemical reactions involved
in DNA damage repair by T4 ligase43 or on the repair and
replication carried out by Taq polymerase and Polymerase III in
response to chemically induced DNA damage.44 Beyond these
in vitro enzymatic studies, experiments involving bacteria and
yeast have provided additional results. During the Spacelab
mission IML-2, frozen Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis bacteria
were exposed to X-ray and ultraviolet (UV) irradiation before
launch. Once in Spacelab, the bacteria were thawed for up to 4.5 h
and frozen again until landing, and then assessed for DNA repair.
Ultimately, no signiﬁcant differences were found either in the re-
joining of DNA strand breaks or in the survival curve between
microgravity conditions and 1 g controls, suggesting that cells
were able to repair radiation-induced DNA damage under real,
albeit
brief,
microgravity.45
In
another
study
(STS-84),
the
temperature dependent repair mutant rad54–3 of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae yeast was irradiated with46 Ni β particles and allowed
time to repair under different temperatures. By measuring the
amount of remaining, unrepaired breaks, researchers demon-
strated that there was no difference in double-strand break repair
between the ﬂight and ground control samples, suggesting no
signiﬁcant impact of the real microgravity condition on this
process.47 While these studies on bacteria and yeast did not show
impaired DNA repair in microgravity, studies on more complex
organisms and human cells have yielded very different results. For
instance, a study on Caenorhabditis elegans showed that several
DDR genes were differentially expressed during the 16.5-day
Shenzhou-8 space mission, suggesting possible enhanced DDR
under microgravity.48 Overall, most of these studies suggest no
effect of space ﬂight on the DDR (Table 2).
Further studies in space have also been conducted using
bleomycin, a chemotherapy drug that is known to induce DNA
damage, including DSBs. It has been reported that human colon
carcinoma cells (HCT-116) treated with bleomycin for 2 days in
space (Space Shuttle STS-95) showed no difference in frequencies
of microsatellite mutations when compared to the ground
controls.49 In a more recent experiment, conﬂuent human
ﬁbroblasts, which were arrested in the G1 phase of the cell cycle,
were also treated with bleomycin on the ISS and ﬁxed after 3 h. In
this
study,
analysis
of
bleomycin-induced
DSBs
and
gene
expression changes showed no signiﬁcant difference between
the ﬂight and ground-treated samples, indicating a lack of
microgravity effect.50
Another experimental design compares how human blood cells
respond to ground-based artiﬁcially induced DNA damage before
and after a space mission. In one study, blood was collected from
an astronaut before ﬂight and within 24 h after the 9-day STS-103
mission. After collection, both samples were exposed to γ rays of
doses between 0 and 3 Gy. Comparison of the dose response for
total chromosomal exchanges showed no differences between
pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight samples suggesting that microgravity
had no lasting effect on DNA repair.51 Alternatively, Greco and
colleagues reported an enhancement of approximately 1.2–2.8-
fold in the chromosome aberration frequency in a post-ﬂight
cosmonaut blood sample compared to parallel pre-ﬂight data
after exposure to ground based X-rays.37 Interestingly however,
for cosmonauts involved in more than one space ﬂight, the
amount of chromosomal aberrations was in the range of the
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 

background before the mission started and did not depend on the
total duration of ﬂights.52 Whether exposure to space radiation
during prior space missions caused this effect by impacting the
response to damages incurred in subsequent missions has been
investigated in astronauts as well. Analysis of chromosome
damage in blood lymphocytes collected from ﬁve astronauts
before and after their ﬁrst and second long duration space ﬂights
detected an increase in chromosome aberrations after both
ﬂights, with no signiﬁcant impact of prior space travel.53 Although
these results are far from conclusive, taken together, studies from
a variety of model systems and humans subjects suggest that
spaceﬂight may indeed play a role in altering the DDR to
radiation-induced damage. Further work is needed in the true
space environment to determine the exact magnitude and
characteristics of such an effect, and understand its impact on
human health.
When faced with DNA damage, programmed cell death is an
important component of the DDR. Therefore, in addition to the
studies aimed at detecting DNA damage levels, investigators have
also analyzed endpoints, such as apoptosis. Spaceﬂight studies
conducted on human lymphocytes have shown an increase in
apoptosis-related markers, such as DNA fragmentation, cleaved-
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, and elevated mRNA levels of p53
and calpain after 48 h on board the ISS.54 Furthermore, cell cycle-
related genes, such as p21, were inhibited in the muscle of rats
from space ﬂights compared to rats on the ground.55 Such studies
indicate that spaceﬂight factors may indeed inﬂuence the rate of
apoptosis and/or cell cycle regulation.
CONCLUSIONS
Space environmental factors can cause damage to the DNA,
resulting in potential detrimental health consequences. Despite
the low dose and dose rate nature of space radiation, there is
evidence suggesting that cosmic rays induce DNA damage both in
cultured cells and in astronauts’ blood cells. There is also evidence
indicating that space environment can generate oxidative DNA
damage in vivo. For instance, as mentioned above, 8-OHdG was
found in urine of astronauts after ﬂight.38
Ultimately, though the biological outcomes of any spaceﬂight-
induced DNA damage also depend on the cellular capacity for
repair. However, results from ground and spaceﬂight studies
concerning microgravity’s effects on the DDR have been conﬂict-
ing. While many studies have reported increased sensitivity to
radiation and decreased DNA repair under simulated microgravity
(Table 1), most of the experiments conducted in space have
shown no effects of spaceﬂight on the capacity of the cells to
repair the artiﬁcially induce DNA damage (Table 2), both within
and across model systems. In some cases, studies that examined
the same endpoints reached opposing conclusions. Perhaps this
stems from the fact that ground analogs for microgravity are
known to produce some, but not all of the biological effects
observed in the true space environment. Experiments conducted
in parallel in space and on the ground are needed to fully justify
the use of ground-based microgravity analogs.
DNA damage and DDR in space are a complex issue. Although
the present review focuses on the interplay of microgravity and
space radiation, other environmental factors faced during space
travel can also induce DNA damage and inﬂuence the DDR. For
example, when inhaled, dust particles covering the surface of
celestial objects56,
57 or toxic chemicals could lead to ROS
production and therefore generate DNA damage. Furthermore,
elevated CO2 present in spacecraft58 should be considered as a
potential DNA damaging factor.59 In addition, inﬂammatory
markers have been reported in astronauts60 and it is known that
inﬂammatory mediators can directly affect the DNA repair process
by either enhancing or repressing DNA repair. In particular, NF-κB,
a key regulator involved in the production of inﬂammatory
proteins, may play an important role in DNA damage sensing and
its subsequent repair. Speciﬁcally, the DDR directly activates NF-
κB, interferon regulatory factors, and a number of ligands for
activating immune receptors.61 As such, a host of other factors
need to be considered and controlled for when conducting and
interpreting spaceﬂight studies.
Furthermore, due to the composition and low ﬂuence nature of
GCRs, over a period of several months cells in space are most likely
hit by several protons before a high-LET heavy ion transverses
them. Thus, prior exposure of cells to the background GCRs might
affect the repair of DNA damage induced by protons emitted from
a large SPE and vice versa. Indeed, suggestions for this come from
studies showing that exposure of human primary cells to protons
followed by
heavy Ti or Fe
ions resulted
in a yield
of
transformation that is greater than the sum of the yields when
the cells were independently exposed to protons or heavy
particles.62, 63 Such synergistic effects were dependent on the
sequence and timing between proton and heavy ion irradiation.
Similarly, after sequential exposures to protons and Fe ions,
human epithelial cells showed the peak of synergistic effects in
the induction of chromosome aberrations when the time window
between the two exposures was 30 min.46 However, another study
showed no synergy between proton and Fe ion exposures
regardless of the exposure sequence.64 Experiments with sequen-
tial exposure to protons and Fe ions have also been conducted in
animals. Dual exposures of C57BL/6 mice to protons and Fe ions
resulted in pronounced molecular alterations in comparison with
either source of radiation alone, as measured by a substantial
increase in the expression of cytokine IL-13, loss of expression of
DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1, and reactivation of LINE-1, SINE B1
retrotransposons,
and
major
and
minor
satellites.65
Finally,
exposure of C57BL/6 mice to Fe ions caused an increase in
expression of α-smooth muscle cell actin, collagen type III, the
inﬂammatory cell markers mast cell tryptase, CD2 and CD68,
the
endothelial
glycoprotein
thrombomodulin,
and
cleaved
caspase 3.66 However, exposure to protons 24 h before Fe ions
prevented all of the responses to Fe ions,66 which again illustrates
how the complex composition and timing of space radiation can
impact the level of DNA damage and the cellular response to such
insults. Therefore, not only microgravity can impact space
radiation-induced DDR, but also the radiation types and sequence
and the exposure duration may inﬂuence the DDR.
In conclusion, carefully designed experiments, perhaps ones
implementing a radiation source or other DNA damage agents in
space are needed given the conﬂict results between the reported
studies on this topic. Higher levels of DNA damage that is
intentionally induced in space would likely be necessary to
achieve
the
results
with
statistical
signiﬁcance.
Meanwhile,
experiments using an in-ﬂight 1 g centrifuge compared to the
micro-g would provide clues to such questions with damage by
natural space radiation levels. However, the assay employed in
such studies has to be sensitive enough to detect the DDR to low
levels of damage.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by grants from the NASA Space Biology Program and
the NASA Human Research Program, and by a German Fellowship Program (MMV).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.M.V. and H.W. designed and wrote the manuscript. M.W. made substantial
contributions to conception and design. T.L. and Y.Z. participated in drafting the
article. M.W. helped with editing and formatting the revision.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

REFERENCES
1. Badhwar, G. D. & O’Neill, P. M. Long-term modulation of galactic cosmic
radiation and its model for space exploration. Adv. Space Res. 14, 749–757
(1994).
2. Cucinotta, F. A. & Durante, M. Cancer risk from exposure to galactic cosmic rays:
implications for space exploration by human beings. Lancet Oncol. 7, 431–435
(2006).
3. Budinger, T. F., Lyman, J. T. & Tobias, C. A. Visual perception of accelerated
nitrogen nuclei interacting with the human retina. Nature 239, 209–211 (1972).
4. Fazio, G. G., Jelley, J. V. & Charman, W. N. Generation of Cherenkov light ﬂashes by
cosmic radiation within the eyes of the Apollo astronauts. Nature 228, 260–264
(1970).
5. Pinsky, L. S., Osborne, W. Z., Hoffman, R. A. & Bailey, J. V. Light ﬂashes observed by
astronauts on skylab 4. Science 188, 928–930 (1975).
6. Cucinotta, F. A., Manuel, F. K., Jones, J., Iszard, G., Murrey, J. & Djojonegro, B. et al.
Space radiation and cataracts in astronauts. Radiat. Res. 156, 460–466 (2001).
7. Kadhim, M., Salomaa, S., Wright, E., Hildebrandt, G., Belyakov, O. V. & Prise, K. M.
et al. Non-targeted effects of ionising radiation–implications for low dose risk.
Mutat. Res. 752, 84–98 (2013).
8. West, J. B. Physiology in microgravity. J. Appl. Physiol. 89, 379–384 (2000).
9. Williams, D., Kuipers, A., Mukai, C. & Thirsk, R. Acclimation during space ﬂight:
effects on human physiology. CMAJ 180, 1317–1323 (2009).
10. Hargens, A. R. & Vico, L. Long-duration bed rest as an analog to microgravity. J.
Appl. Physiol. 120, 891–903 (2016).
11. Herranz, R., Anken, R., Boonstra, J., Braun, M., Christianen, P. C. & de Geest, M. et al.
Ground-based facilities for simulation of microgravity: organism-speciﬁc recom-
mendations for their use, and recommended terminology. Astrobiology 13, 1–17
(2013).
12. Morey-Holton, E. R. & Globus, R. K. Hindlimb unloading rodent model: technical
aspects. J. Appl. Physiol. 92, 1367–1377 (2002).
13. Roberts, J. E., Kukielczak, B. M., Chignell, C. F., Sik, B. H., Hu, D. N. & Principato, M.
A. Simulated microgravity induced damage in human retinal pigment epithelial
cells. Mol. Vis. 12, 633–638 (2006).
14. Rai, B., Kaur, J., Catalina, M., Anand, S. C., Jacobs, R. & Teughels, W. Effect of
simulated microgravity on salivary and serum oxidants, antioxidants, and peri-
odontal status. J. Periodontol. 82, 1478–1482 (2011).
15. Li, N., An, L. & Hang, H. Increased sensitivity of DNA damage response-deﬁcient
cells to stimulated microgravity-induced DNA lesions. PLoS One 10, e0125236
(2015).
16. Benavides Damm, T., Richard, S., Tanner, S., Wyss, F., Egli, M. & Franco-Obregon, A.
Calcium-dependent deceleration of the cell cycle in muscle cells by simulated
microgravity. FASEB J. 27, 2045–2054 (2013).
17. Kumari, R., Singh, K. P. & Dumond, J. W. Jr. Simulated microgravity decreases DNA
repair capacity and induces DNA damage in human lymphocytes. J. Cell. Biochem.
107, 723–731 (2009).
18. Risin, D. & Pellis, N. R. Modeled microgravity inhibits apoptosis in peripheral blood
lymphocytes. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Anim. 37, 66–72 (2001).
19. Thiel, C. S., Paulsen, K., Bradacs, G., Lust, K., Tauber, S. & Dumrese, C. et al. Rapid
alterations of cell cycle control proteins in human T lymphocytes in microgravity.
Cell Commun. Signal. 10, 1 (2012).
20. Cesarone, C. F., Pippia, P., Demori, I., Scarabelli, L. & Fugassa, E. Effect of simulated
microgravity conditions on poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity in primary cul-
tures of adult rat hepatocytes. J. Gravit. Physiol. 8, P127–P128 (2001).
21. Degan, P., Cesarone, C. F., Ottaggio, L., Galleri, G., Meloni, M. A. & Zunino, A. et al.
Effects of simulated microgravity on metabolic activities related to DNA damage
and repair in lymphoblastoid cells. J. Gravit. Physiol. 8, P21–P22 (2001).
22. Wang, Y., An, L., Jiang, Y. & Hang, H. Effects of simulated microgravity on
embryonic stem cells. PLoS One 6, e29214 (2011).
23. Mosesso, P., Schuber, M., Seibt, D., Schmitz, C., Fiore, M. & Schinoppi, A. et al. X-
ray-induced chromosome aberrations in human lymphocytes in vitro are
potentiated under simulated microgravity conditions (Clinostat). Phys. Med. 17,
264–266 (2001).
24. Manti, L., Durante, M., Cirrone, G. A., Grossi, G., Lattuada, M. & Pugliese, M. et al.
Modelled microgravity does not modify the yield of chromosome aberrations
induced by high-energy protons in human lymphocytes. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 81,
147–155 (2005).
25. Canova, S., Fiorasi, F., Mognato, M., Grifalconi, M., Reddi, E. & Russo, A. et al.
“Modeled microgravity” affects cell response to ionizing radiation and increases
genomic damage. Radiat. Res. 163, 191–199 (2005).
26. Mognato, M. & Celotti, L. Modeled microgravity affects cell survival and HPRT
mutant frequency, but not the expression of DNA repair genes in human lym-
phocytes irradiated with ionising radiation. Mutat. Res. 578, 417–429 (2005).
27. Girardi, C., De Pitta, C., Casara, S., Sales, G., Lanfranchi, G. & Celotti, L. et al. Analysis
of miRNA and mRNA expression proﬁles highlights alterations in ionizing
radiation response of human lymphocytes under modeled microgravity. PLoS
One 7, e31293 (2012).
28. Mognato, M., Girardi, C., Fabris, S. & Celotti, L. DNA repair in modeled micro-
gravity: double strand break rejoining activity in human lymphocytes irradiated
with gamma-rays. Mutat. Res. 663, 32–39 (2009).
29. Dang, B., Yang, Y., Zhang, E., Li, W., Mi, X. & Meng, Y. et al. Simulated microgravity
increases heavy ion radiation-induced apoptosis in human B lymphoblasts. Life
Sci. 97, 123–128 (2014).
30. Li, H. Y., Zhang, H., Miao, G. Y., Xie, Y., Sun, C. & Di, C. X. et al. Simulated micro-
gravity conditions and carbon ion irradiation induce spermatogenic cell apop-
tosis and sperm DNA damage. Biomed. Environ. Sci. 26, 726–734 (2013).
31. Ohnishi, T., Ohnishi, K., Takahashi, A., Taniguchi, Y., Sato, M. & Nakano, T. et al.
Detection of DNA damage induced by space radiation in Mir and space shuttle. J
Radiat. Res. 43, S133–S136 (2002).
32. Yatagai, F., Honma, M., Takahashi, A., Omori, K., Suzuki, H. & Shimazu, T. et al.
Frozen human cells can record radiation damage accumulated during space
ﬂight: mutation induction and radioadaptation. Radiat. Environ. Biophys. 50,
125–134 (2011).
33. Ohnishi, T., Takahashi, A., Nagamatsu, A., Omori, K., Suzuki, H. & Shimazu, T. et al.
Detection of space radiation-induced double strand breaks as a track in cell
nucleus. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 390, 485–488 (2009).
34. Dieriks, B., De Vos, W., Meesen, G., Van Oostveldt, K., De Meyer, T. & Ghardi, M.
et al. High content analysis of human ﬁbroblast cell cultures after exposure to
space radiation. Radiat. Res. 172, 423–436 (2009).
35. Lu T, Zhang Y, Wong M, Feiveson A, Gaza R, Stofﬂe N, et al. Detection of DNA
damage by space radiation in human ﬁbroblasts ﬂown on the International Space
Station. Life Sci. Space Res. (Amst). 12, 24–31 (2017).
36. George, K., Durante, M., Wu, H., Willingham, V., Badhwar, G. & Cucinotta, F. A.
Chromosome aberrations in the blood lymphocytes of astronauts after space
ﬂight. Radiat. Res. 156, 731–738 (2001).
37. Greco, O., Durante, M., Gialanella, G., Grossi, G., Pugliese, M. & Scampoli, P. et al.
Biological dosimetry in Russian and Italian astronauts. Adv. Space Res. 31,
1495–1503 (2003).
38. Stein, T. P. & Leskiw, M. J. Oxidant damage during and after spaceﬂight. Am. J.
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 278, E375–E382 (2000).
39. Bender, M. A., Gooch, P. C. & Kondo, S. The Gemini-3 S-4 spaceﬂight-radiation
interaction experiment. Radiat. Res. 31, 91–111 (1967).
40. Bender, M. A., Gooch, P. C. & Kondo, S. The Gemini XI S-4 spaceﬂight-radiation
interaction experiment: the human blood experiment. Radiat. Res. 34, 228–238
(1968).
41. Horneck, G. Impact of microgravity on radiobiological processes and efﬁciency of
DNA repair. Mutat. Res. 430, 221–228 (1999).
42. Kiefer, J. & Pross, H. D. Space radiation effects and microgravity. Mutat. Res. 430,
299–305 (1999).
43. Takahashi, A., Ohnishi, K., Takahashi, S., Masukawa, M., Sekikawa, K. & Amano, T.
et al. The effects of microgravity on ligase activity in the repair of DNA double-
strand breaks. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 76, 783–788 (2000).
44. Ohnishi, T., Takahashi, A., Ohnishi, K., Takahashi, S., Masukawa, M. & Sekikawa, K.
et al. Alkylating agent (MNU)-induced mutation in space environment. Adv. Space
Res. 28, 563–568 (2001).
45. Horneck, G., Rettberg, P., Kozubek, S., Baumstark-Khan, C., Rink, H. & Schafer, M.
et al. The inﬂuence of microgravity on repair of radiation-induced DNA damage
in bacteria and human ﬁbroblasts. Radiat. Res. 147, 376–384 (1997).
46. Hada, M., Meador, J. A., Cucinotta, F. A., Gonda, S. R. & Wu, H. Chromosome
aberrations induced by dual exposure of protons and iron ions. Radiat. Environ.
Biophys. 46, 125–129 (2007).
47. Pross, H. D., Casares, A. & Kiefer, J. Induction and repair of DNA double-strand
breaks under irradiation and microgravity. Radiat. Res. 153, 521–525 (2000).
48. Gao, Y., Xu, D., Zhao, L., Zhang, M. & Sun, Y. Effects of microgravity on DNA
damage response in Caenorhabditis elegans during Shenzhou-8 spaceﬂight. Int.
J. Radiat. Biol. 91, 531–539 (2015).
49. Ishizaki, K., Nishizawa, K., Kato, T., Kitao, H., Han, Z. B. & Hirayama, J. et al. Genetic
changes induced in human cells in Space Shuttle experiment (STS-95). PLoS One
12, e0170358 (2017).
50. Lu, T., Zhang, Y., Kidane, Y., Feiveson, A., Stodieck, L., Karouia, K., Ramesh, G.,
Rohde, L. & Wu, H. Cellular responses and gene expression proﬁle changes
due to bleomycin-induced DNA damage in human ﬁbroblasts in space. PLoS One
12, e0170358 (2017).
51. Wu, H., George, K., Willingham, V. & Cucinotta, F. A. Comparison of chromosome
aberration frequencies in pre- and post-ﬂight astronaut lymphocytes irradiated
in vitro with gamma rays. Phys. Med. 17, 229–231 (2001).
52. Durante, M., Snigiryova, G., Akaeva, E., Bogomazova, A., Druzhinin, S. & Fedor-
enko, B. et al. Chromosome aberration dosimetry in cosmonauts after single or
multiple space ﬂights. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 103, 40–46 (2003).
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 

53. George, K., Rhone, J., Beitman, A. & Cucinotta, F. A. Cytogenetic damage in the
blood lymphocytes of astronauts: effects of repeat long-duration space missions.
Mutat. Res. 756, 165–169 (2013).
54. Battista, N., Meloni, M. A., Bari, M., Mastrangelo, N., Galleri, G. & Rapino, C. et al. 5-
Lipoxygenase-dependent apoptosis of human lymphocytes in the International
Space Station: data from the ROALD experiment. FASEB J. 26, 1791–1798 (2012).
55. Taylor, W. E., Bhasin, S., Lalani, R., Datta, A. & Gonzalez-Cadavid, N. F. Alteration of
gene expression proﬁles in skeletal muscle of rats exposed to microgravity during
a spaceﬂight. J. Gravit. Physiol. 9, 61–70 (2002).
56. Kaura, J., Rickman, D. & Schoonena, M. A. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) gen-
eration by lunar simulants. Acta Astronaut. 122, 196–208 (2016).
57. Turci, F., Corazzari, I., Alberto, G., Martra, G. & Fubini, B. Free-radical chemistry as a
means to evaluate lunar dust health hazard in view of future missions to the
moon. Astrobiology 15, 371–380 (2015).
58. Law, J., Van Baalen, M., Foy, M., Mason, S. S., Mendez, C. & Wear, M. L. et al.
Relationship between carbon dioxide levels and reported headaches on the
international space station. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 56, 477–483 (2014).
59. Lu, C. Y., Ma, Y. C., Lin, J. M., Chuang, C. Y. & Sung, F. C. Oxidative DNA damage
estimated by urinary 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine and indoor air pollution among
non-smoking ofﬁce employees. Environ. Res. 103, 331–337 (2007).
60. Crucian, B. E., Cubbage, M. L. & Sams, C. F. Altered cytokine production by speciﬁc
human peripheral blood cell subsets immediately following space ﬂight. J.
Interferon Cytokine. Res. 20, 547–556 (2000).
61. Kidane, D., Chae, W. J., Czochor, J., Eckert, K. A., Glazer, P. M. & Bothwell, A. L. et al.
Interplay between DNA repair and inﬂammation, and the link to cancer. Crit. Rev.
Biochem. Mol. Biol. 49, 116–139 (2014).
62. Bennett, P. V., Cutter, N. C. & Sutherland, B. M. Split-dose exposures versus dual
ion exposure in human cell neoplastic transformation. Radiat. Environ. Biophys.
46, 119–123 (2007).
63. Zhou, G., Bennett, P. V., Cutter, N. C. & Sutherland, B. M. Proton-HZE-particle
sequential dual-beam exposures increase anchorage-independent growth fre-
quencies in primary human ﬁbroblasts. Radiat. Res. 166, 488–494 (2006).
64. Elmore, E., Lao, X. Y., Kapadia, R., Swete, M. & Redpath, J. L. Neoplastic transfor-
mation in vitro by mixed beams of high-energy iron ions and protons. Radiat. Res.
176, 291–302 (2011).
65. Nzabarushimana, E., Prior, S., Miousse, I. R., Pathak, R., Allen, A. R. & Latendresse, J.
et al. Combined exposure to protons and (56)Fe leads to overexpression of Il13
and reactivation of repetitive elements in the mouse lung. Life Sci. Space Res. 7,
1–8 (2015).
66. Ramadan, S. S., Sridharan, V., Koturbash, I., Miousse, I. R., Hauer-Jensen, M. &
Nelson, G. A. et al. A priming dose of protons alters the early cardiac cellular
and molecular response to (56)Fe irradiation. Life Sci. Space Res. 8, 8–13
(2016).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2017
Role of space radiation and microgravity in DNA damage
M Moreno-Villanueva et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2017)  14 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
