REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 28 October 2014
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00563
Light and gravity signals synergize in modulating plant
development
Joshua P. Vandenbrink1, John Z. Kiss1, Raul Herranz 2 and F. Javier Medina 2*
1 Department of Biology, University of Mississippi, University, MS, USA
2 Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Edited by:
William David Teale, University of
Freiburg, Germany
Reviewed by:
Stephan Pollmann, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
Ranjan Swarup, University of
Nottingham, UK
*Correspondence:
F. Javier Medina, Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC),
Ramiro de Maeztu 9, E-28040 Madrid,
Spain
e-mail: fjmedina@cib.csic.es
Tropisms are growth-mediated plant movements that help plants to respond to changes
in environmental stimuli. The availability of water and light, as well as the presence of
a constant gravity vector, are all environmental stimuli that plants sense and respond
to via directed growth movements (tropisms). The plant response to gravity (gravitropism)
and the response to unidirectional light (phototropism) have long been shown to be
interconnected growth phenomena. Here, we discuss the similarities in these two
processes, as well as the known molecular mechanisms behind the tropistic responses.We
also highlight research done in a microgravity environment in order to decouple two
tropisms through experiments carried out in the absence of a signiﬁcant unilateral gravity
vector. In addition, alteration of gravity, especially the microgravity environment, and light
irradiation produce important effects on meristematic cells, the undifferentiated, highly
proliferating, totipotent cells which sustain plant development. Microgravity produces
the disruption of meristematic competence, i.e., the decoupling of cell proliferation and
cell growth, affecting the regulation of the cell cycle and ribosome biogenesis. Light
irradiation, especially red light, mediated by phytochromes, has an activating effect on
these processes. Phytohormones, particularly auxin, also are key mediators in these
alterations. Upcoming experiments on the International Space Station will clarify some
of the mechanisms and molecular players of the plant responses to these environmental
signals involved in tropisms and the cell cycle.
Keywords: gravitropism, phototropism, phytochromes, auxin, meristematic cells, cell cycle, ribosome biogenesis,
space biology
INTRODUCTION
Plants live in dynamic, ever-changing environments. To survive
and thrive in these environments, plants have developed survival
strategies to cope with the changing conditions (temperature,
water, sunlight availability, etc.). Due to their stationary nature,
plants have evolved growth-mediated movements that help them
to adapt to changes in their surrounding environment. These
directed growth movements (termed tropisms) help ensure the ﬁt-
ness and survival of the plant. For instance, plants generally direct
root growth down into the soil (gravitropism) to help anchor the
plant and absorb water (hydrotropism) and nutrients while direct-
ing shoot growth upward toward a source of light (phototropism;
Molas and Kiss, 2009 and heliotropism; Vandenbrink et al., 2014).
In addition, climbing plants such as vines send out tendrils that
come into contact with an object and proceed to grow themselves
around the object for support (thigmotropism).
The ability of plants to grow in response to environmental
stimuli has been documented throughout history. Theophras-
tus, a disciple of Aristotle, noted the phototropic and heliotropic
(modiﬁed phototropism) movements of plants. Theophrastus
(erroneously) attributed the bending of a plant toward the sun
as a byproduct of the sun’s rays removing liquid from the illu-
minated side of the plant (Theophrastus, 1976). The theory of
water loss as the cause of phototropic growth was further cham-
pioned by Bacon and Sylvarum (1627). In addition, poems dating
back to ancient Rome detail observations of plants moving in
response to the ever-changing position of the sun (Ovid, 2008).
However, it was not until the publishing of Charles and Fran-
cis Darwin’s “The Power of Movement in Plants” that our current
understanding of plant tropistic movements began to take shape
(Darwin and Darwin, 1880). Darwin detailed experiments involv-
ing “heliotropic” movement (subsequently termed phototropic
movement), plant circumnutation, responses to gravity as well
as other nastic plant movements. In his experiments, Darwin
detailed how plants sense external stimuli such as light and grav-
ity and are able to respond through directional growth-mediated
movements. In addition, Darwin outlined that perception of a
stimulus and plant growth response do not necessarily happen in
the same organ of the plant. Additionally, Darwin observed that
the phototropic response was most distinct when the plant was
illuminated with blue light, suggesting speciﬁcity in sensing the
light source. His work also hypothesized the existence of a factor
that moves from the site of stimulus perception to the sight of
growth response, an idea that contributed to the discovery of the
plant hormone auxin decades later.
Similar to phototropism, gravitropism has a long history of
inquiry. One of the ﬁrst characterizations of plant gravitropic
response was detailed by Knight (1806). However, as noted in
his paper, observations of gravitropic response long pre-dated his
inquiry. To better understand the gravitropism in plants, Knight
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 1

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
altered the perceived gravity vector by germinating garden beans
on a wheel rotating perpendicular to the earth’s gravity vector.
The beans germinating on the wheel responded to the new grav-
ity vector by directing the growth of roots to the center of the
wheel, and shoots toward its periphery, suggesting that gravity
was responsible for plant orientation. In addition to Knight’s ini-
tial work, “The Power of Movement in Plants” was also seminal
in the understanding of gravitropic movements. Darwin demon-
strated that the tip of the root (root cap) was responsible for
sensing the gravity vector through various dissection experiments.
This observation led to the elucidation that once a new gravity
vector was sensed, the root tip would produce a signal to pro-
mote differential cell growth on the two opposing sides of the
root.
Darwin originally characterized the connection between grav-
itropism and phototropism in“The Power of Movement in Plants.”
Since that time, efforts have been made to understand the rela-
tionship between the two processes, as well as trying to untangle
the two to understand each in its own right. Since the initial
characterization of phototropic and gravitropic movement, many
of the underlying mechanisms of perception, transduction and
response have been uncovered, yet little is known about the inter-
play between the two processes. Initially, studying the phototropic
response alone was impossible as there was no way to remove the
gravity vector on a terrestrial platform. Attempts to simulate the
effects of reduced gravity via perpetual rotation on a clinostat
or via free fall machines provide a proxy for microgravity by
reducing the plant’s ability to perceive the gravity vector, but the
gravity vector is never truly removed (Herranz et al., 2013a). In
addition, these methods often have the unintended consequence
of additional stresses being imparted on the sample. However, the
advent of space research has allowed for the ﬁrst true uncoupling
of phototropic and gravitropic growth responses (Ferl et al., 2002;
Wolverton and Kiss, 2009).
GRAVITROPISM
While gravity is a constant vector that acts equally across all parts
of an organism, higher plants contain specialized cells (termed
statocytes) responsible for sensing gravity (Kiss, 2000; Saito et al.,
2005). In ﬂowering plants, the gravitropic response mechanism is
localized primarily in two tissue types. In roots, specialized gravity
sensing cells reside in the columella of the root cap (Figure 1),
whereas evidence shows that plant shoots sense gravity via endo-
dermal cells (Figure 2) – a single layer of cells between the vascular
tissue and cortex (Fukaki et al., 1998; MacCleery and Kiss, 1999).
These two specialized tissues are responsible for sensing the direc-
tion of the gravity vector and relaying the information to other
areas of the plant for a response, such as differential growth
along a zone of elongation (Sack, 1991). Generally light (pho-
totropism) has an overriding effect on the gravitropic response of
shoot tissue, however many studies have shown interplay between
the two phenomena (Molas and Kiss, 2009).
FIGURE 1 | Root tissue sensing and response to gravistimulation by
reorientation. (A) The statoliths of gravity-perceiving columella cells settle
to the bottom of the cells relative to gravity, which results in a symmetrical
distribution of auxin through all sides of the root cap and equal growth in
the root elongation zone (apical of the root cap, not pictured). (B) Upon
gravistimulation by reorientation, the statoliths settle at a new position
toward the gravity vector. The new position is perceived by the cell,
whereby a cascade of signals leads to an unequal distribution of auxin to
the side of the root nearest the new gravity vector. This unequal
distribution of auxin reduces cell growth where concentrations are high,
resulting in growth-mediated bending of the root in the direction of the
new gravity vector.
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 2

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
FIGURE 2 | Stem tissue sensing and response to gravistimulation by
reorientation. In stems, the gravity perceiving cells are located within the
endodermis. Upon stimulation from a new gravity vector, the statoliths
settle to the lateral side of the cell nearest the gravity vector. The new
position of the statoliths leads to a differential increase in auxin
concentration in the lateral tissue, and differential growth thereby occurs on
the two opposite sides of the stem. This differential growth results in a
bending of the stem away from the direction of the gravity vector.
MECHANISM: SENSING OF GRAVITY AT THE ROOT AND SHOOT APICES
The starch-statolith hypothesis proposes that perception is
mediated by the interaction of dense starch-ﬁlled organelles
(termed statoliths) with other cytoplasmic structures in order to
provide directional information to the plant (Kiss, 2000; Saito
et al., 2005). A change in the position of the plant leads to a
change in the potential energy of the amyloplasts, the statoliths
in ﬂowering plants. This energy is then transferred to the plasma
membrane as the statoliths settle at a new position in the direction
of the new gravity vector. This new position can then be relayed
to the rest of the plant via the plant hormone auxin (Simmons
et al., 1995; Firn et al., 2000) and then a gravitropic response can
be initiated.
Roots most often display positive gravitropism, growing in the
direction of the gravity vector and thus into the soil (Figure 1).
When measuring the gravitropic response of roots of Arabidop-
sis starchless mutants, it was observed that the time of response
was severely reduced and delayed compared to the response in
wild-type genotypes. A similar response was observed in roots
and hypocotyls of Nicotiana reduced starch mutants (Kiss and
Sack, 1989, 1990). The gravitropic response of roots has also
been shown to be linked to the actual rate at which amyloplast
sedimentation occurs in Arabidopsis (MacCleery and Kiss, 1999).
Furthermore, the gravitropic response has also been correlated to
the total mass of statoliths in the root columella cells (Kiss et al.,
1996, 1997).
In contrast to roots, stems and stem-like organs exhibit neg-
ative gravitropism, growing upward and away from the gravity
vector. Mutants lacking amyloplasts in the endodermal cell layer
lack gravitropic responses (Fujihira et al., 2000). In addition,
stems of starch-deﬁcient Arabidopsis correlated the total mass
of starch in endodermal tissue to a change in the response to
gravity (Kiss et al., 1997). In addition, gravity perception plays
a role in plant development. Stem-like organs often maintain
speciﬁc angles in relation to gravity, known as a gravitropic
setpoint angle (GSA; Digby and Firn, 1995). The GSA oper-
ates through the existence of an antigravitropic offset mecha-
nism that works in tension with gravitropism. The magnitude
of the antigravitropic offset in relation to gravitropism deter-
mines the magnitude of the lateral stem’s angle. GSA values
are modulated via the plant hormone auxin in the gravity sens-
ing cells of root and shoot tissue, further implicating the role
of auxin in tropism and plant architecture (Roychoudhry et al.,
2013).
Further support for the starch-statolith hypotheses is provided
by studies which reported that plants lacking starch in the stem
endodermal amyloplasts also have a severely reduced gravitropic
response (Weise and Kiss, 1999). This suggests that in stem the
gravitropic response is similarly regulated by starch-ﬁlled amy-
loplasts. In addition, amyloplasts lacking a full complement of
starch show reduced ability to perceive gravity in Arabidopsis (Kiss
et al., 1996, 1997, 1998a,b). However, starch-deﬁcient mutants
lacking a full complement but grown in hypergravity environ-
ments (2–10 × g) restored the gravitropic response (Fitzelle and
Kiss, 2001).
An alternative model to statolith-based gravity sensing is the
protoplast-pressure hypothesis, where the total mass of the cyto-
plasm causes tension on the top and bottom of the plasma
membrane (relative to the gravity vector; Wayne et al., 1990;
Wayne and Staves, 1996). This model is largely based on stud-
ies of Characean algae Nitellopsis and Chara, both of which do
not contain starch-ﬁlled amyloplasts yet still respond to gravity
stimulus by exhibiting a gravity-dependent cytoplasmic streaming
(Wayne et al., 1992; Staves, 1997). In addition, support for the
protoplast-pressure hypothesis arises from the fact that starch-
less mutants of Arabidopsis, while greatly reduced, can still sense
and respond to gravity (Kiss et al., 1989). Furthermore, propo-
nents of the protoplast-pressure hypothesis point out that studies
using starch mutants (key evidence in support of the starch-
statolith hypothesis) do not discriminate effectively between the
two competing hypothesis (Staves et al., 1997a). A study of
gravitropism in the roots of rice (Oryza sativa, Poaceae) used
variable densities of an external media to exert more or less
force on root tissue without changing statolith sedimentation
rate, resulting in changes in gravitropic response (Staves et al.,
1997b).
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 3

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
While some debate still exists between the validity of the two
models, it is likely a combination of multiple gravity sensing mech-
anisms that control gravitropism. It has been proposed that similar
to the way in which a plant senses light, where multiple photosen-
sory mechanisms exist, plants may contain multiple mechanisms
which help to perceive the gravity vector (Sack, 1997). In addition,
Perbal (1999) proposed that statoliths and the protoplast both
can act in gravity sensing, with statoliths being the more sensitive
mechanism. A commentary suggests that throughout evolution,
higher plants have acquired multiple gravisensing mechanisms as
evolution is unlikely to select against a process that aids in ﬁt-
ness (Barlow, 1995). Additionally, Barlow (1995) supposes that
gravity sensory redundancy allows gravity to play a larger role
in plant development through the evolution of distinct signaling
pathways.
TRANSDUCTION OF THE GRAVITY SIGNAL AND THE RESPONSE PHASE
Upon sensing of the gravity stimulus, the cell needs to convey the
message to the elongation zone before differential growth leading
to curvature can occur. In the case of stem tissue, the elongation
region is nearby, requiring lateral transmission of the signal to this
tissue (Figure 2). However, in the case of roots, the signal must be
conveyed over a relatively longer distance to the root elongation
zone (Figure 1). While various signal transduction mechanisms
have been proposed, there is a great deal of evidence that supports
the role of the plant cytoskeleton being involved in gravity trans-
duction. It has been suggested that microtubules may be involved
in the perception of gravity in coleoptiles (Blancaﬂor, 2002). In
addition, depolymerization of the F-actin cytoskeleton results in
promotion of gravitropic curvature in stems and roots, suggest-
ing that the actin cytoskeleton may play a role in regulation of
the gravitropic response (Yamamoto and Kiss, 2002; Hou et al.,
2003).
While a role for the cytoskeleton in gravitropic response seems
evident, little is known about the mechanism that associates the
cytoskeleton with amyloplasts. The actin-tether model proposes
that amyloplasts are physically associated with the cytoskeleton,
and reorientation in respect to the gravity vector causes the amy-
loplasts to exert tension or slack on the cytoskeleton (Baluška
and Hasenstein, 1997). This change in tension is then relayed
to the plasma membrane, where the signal can then be trans-
duced. A second hypothesis, the tensegrity model, proposes that
amyloplasts are not attached to the cytoskeleton. Instead, as the
amyloplasts reorient to a new gravity vector, they come into con-
tact and disrupt the actin microﬁlament network. The signal is
then transduced to the plasma membrane, where Ca2+ stores
within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are released (Yoder et al.,
2001).
As stated previously, the new relative position of the amylo-
plast (serving a statolith) is perceived by the cell. One observation
is the statocyte responds to gravistimulation by increasing the
cytosolic Ca2+ concentration and reducing the cytosolic proton
concentration, which leads to auxin being differential distributed
in the direction of the gravity vector (Tasaka et al., 1999; Morita
and Tasaka, 2004). The resulting differential distribution of auxin
results in unilateral inhibition of root growth on one side, caus-
ing the root to grow in a new downward orientation toward
the gravity vector. It has been proposed that the ER acts as
a Ca2+ reservoir; once statoliths settle in the direction of the
gravity vector and contact the ER, stored Ca2+ is released into
the cell (Perbal and Driss-Ecole, 2003). A study using high-
resolution electron tomography adds support to this hypothesis,
ﬁnding statolith sedimentation on the ER was sufﬁcient in locally
deforming the ER membrane, and in turn had the potential to
activate local mechanosensitive ion channels (Leitz et al., 2009).
The authors of this study further suggest that transmission of
the gravisensory signal results from a combination of kinetic
energy being transferred to the ER from the statolith, rapid
release of kinetic energy from the ER upon initial reorientation
of the columella cell, as well as statolith-driven motion of the
cell cytosol. Furthermore, it is possible that calcium release acts
as a signaling molecule during gravistimulation. A recent study
indicates that an enzyme in the ethylene biosynthesis pathway
(1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase) requires Ca2+ to
elicit a gravitropic response, suggesting Ca2+ may be a signal-
ing element for downstream growth regulation (Huang et al.,
2013).
Perception of gravity by the root cap has been shown to result
in asymmetrical auxin distribution across the root, leading to
differential growth in the root elongation zone (Ottenschläger
et al., 2003). A mathematical model inferring auxin distribution
suggests a rapid (within 5 min) twofold increase in the auxin con-
tent on the lower side of the root, which leads to inhibition of
growth and bending of the stem (Band et al., 2012). However, the
mechanism and genes involved in the formation for the auxin
gradient still remains unclear. Various genes (e.g., PIN, ABCB,
and AUX/LAX families) have been implicated in the transport of
auxin from the root cap to the distal elongation zone, yet a deﬁned
mechanism remains elusive (Luschnig et al., 1998; Petrášek and
Friml, 2009). In addition to the identiﬁcation of genes involved
in auxin transport, regulators of the proposed transport genes
such as the PIN regulator GOLVEN (GLV), which encode for
small secretory peptides, have been shown to regulate the distri-
bution of PIN2 and therefore the formation of the auxin gradient
responsiblefordifferentialgrowthingravitropism(Whitfordet al.,
2012).
Apotentiallyimportantfacilitatorof auxintransportisAtPIN3.
PIN3 has been implicated in both hypocotyl and root tropisms. In
the hypocotyl, PIN3 is expressed in the shoot endodermis, suggest-
ing it may mediate the lateral distribution of auxin (Friml et al.,
2002). In the columella cells of the root, PIN3 localizes along the
plasma membrane symmetrically, but quickly (within ∼2 min)
relocalizes to the bottom plasma membrane upon gravistimula-
tion by reorientation. This relocalization of PIN3 coincides well
with the redistribution of auxin along the root cap and endoder-
mal cells to the elongation zone. This results in auxin inhibiting
the growth of cells in the elongation zone nearest the gravity vec-
tor, causing the stem to grow downward toward the new gravity
vector. Evidence shows that auxin efﬂux complexes such as PIN
proteins cycle along the actin cytoskeleton between the plasma
membrane and endosome (Geldner et al., 2001). These results are
in accordance with models that suggest that the actin cytoskeleton
reorganizes in concert with statolith sedimentation (Baluška and
Hasenstein, 1997; Yoder et al., 2001). This reorganization would
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 4

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
help to facilitate PIN3 relocalization to the new perceived bottom
of the cell.
A recent study has shown that the regulation of PIN2 on oppos-
ing sides of gravistimulated root tissue is controlled by an auxin
feedback mechanism (Baster et al., 2013). Auxin was shown to
control the plasma membrane PIN abundance though vacuolar
targeting and degradation through a specialized auxin receptor.
This observation indicates that auxin plays a role in recycling the
PIN proteins to the plasma membrane or to send them to the
vacuole for degradation. Interestingly, the same study indicated
that auxin leads to degradation of PIN in the presence of low
auxin content as well. These results suggest that during a gravit-
ropic response, auxin leads to the degradation of the PIN proteins
coinciding with the different auxin gradients present during a
gravitropic response. Additionally, a study by Löfke et al. (2013)
has proposed that another plant hormone, gibberellic acid (GA),
plays a key role in the trafﬁcking of PIN proteins. Results showed
that high GA promoted trafﬁcking of PIN back to the plasma
membrane, while low GA concentrations resulted in trafﬁcking to
the vacuole for degradation (Löfke et al., 2013). Taken together,
these studies suggest that trafﬁcking of PIN proteins is impor-
tant in regulating auxin ﬂow and initiating the differential growth
response.
It is likely that AUXIN RESISTANT1 (AUX1) is responsible for
the uptake of auxin in the gravity sensing tissue (endodermis and
columella of the root cap), while PIN2 facilitates the transport
from the root cap to the elongation zone (Friml, 2003). Genetic
expression analysis of AUX1 suggests that AUX1 is required for
root gravitropic response and is associated with basipetal auxin
transport from the root cap to the elongation zone (Swarup et al.,
2001). Recently, it has been proposed that AUX1/LAX genes are
responsible for tissue speciﬁcity of high auxin levels, while PIN
proteins are responsible for directing the ﬂow of auxin from the
root cap (Band et al., 2014). This evidence suggests that PIN and
AUX/LAX proteins are key components of the signal transduc-
tion pathway from the columella cells to the elongation zone
(Swarup et al., 2005). However, to date, many aspects of signal
transduction between statocytes and the growth response remain
unclear.
While sensing of the gravity vector is similar in both roots
and shoots, it is possible that the mode of signal transduction is
different. In roots, gravity perception takes place in the columella
cells, and transferred to the elongation zone which is proximal to
the columella cells (Kiss, 2000). Differential auxin concentrations
between the two sides of the root cap have been correlated with
bending of root tissue (Luschnig et al., 1998). In addition, while
there is spatial separation of perception and response in roots, in
shoots, perception and response occur in the same area (Molas and
Kiss, 2009). It also has been suggested that perception of gravity
occurs in the root columella cells and is transferred distantly to
the shoot tissue, suggesting a larger role for root graviperception
(Hopkins and Kiss, 2012).
Recent studies have also implicated plastid membrane proteins
playing a key role in gravitropism. A mutation in Arabidopsis
termed ARG1 (altered response to gravity) results in altered root
and hypocotyl gravitropism without negative effects on other pro-
cesses such as phototropism, root growth or starch accumulation
(Sedbrook et al., 1999). The ARG1 gene encodes a DnaJ-like
domain similar to cytoskeleton-interacting proteins. Additionally,
studies have demonstrated that ARG1 is a membrane protein that
potentially co-localizes with the PIN proteins (Boonsirichai et al.,
2003). Furthermore, this study demonstrated that targeting of
ARG1 to the endodermis or columella cells was sufﬁcient in rescu-
ing the phenotype in gravitropism-deﬁcient mutants. ARG1 and
its paralogARL2 (ARG1-LIKE2) have been shown to associated in-
complex with actin (Harrison and Masson, 2008a). Additionally,
these two proteins are required for the asymmetrical distribution
of auxin during gravitropic stimulation (Harrison and Masson,
2008b). ARG1 mutants have also shown to exhibit reduced plastid
sedimentation, suggesting a role in both perception and signal-
ing arising from gravitropic stimulation (Kumar et al., 2008).
A study by Strohm et al. (2014) has shown that mutants of
the Translocon at the Outer membrane of Chloroplast complex
(TOC) show decreased gravitropic response in arg1 mutants of
Arabidopsis. This complex is responsible for the transport of
nuclear-encoded proteins into plastids, however, the identity of
which proteins need to be imported for a gravitropic response
remains unclear. The study indicated that plastids not only play a
role in gravity perception but also play a role in signal transduc-
tion. Another Arabidopsis mutant, eal1 (endodermal-amyloplast
less 1), completely lacks gravitropic movement in stems, while
gravitropic response in roots remains unaffected (Fujihira et al.,
2000). Map based cloning techniques have identiﬁed eal1 as an
allele of the transcription factor SHORT-ROOT (SHR; Morita
et al., 2007).
Another group of compounds that have been implicated in
gravitropic response is jasmonic acid (JA). JA increases signiﬁ-
cantly during gravitropic stimulation (Gutjahr et al., 2005). Not
surprisingly JA has been shown to have multiple interactions with
auxin (Riemann et al., 2003, and reviewed by Hofmann and Poll-
mann, 2008 and Wasternack and Hause, 2013). In rice coleoptiles,
jasmonates have been shown to be present in a gradient opposite
the auxin gradient during gravitropic stimulation (Gutjahr et al.,
2005). In addition, lipozygenase, a key enzyme in JA-biosynthesis,
has been shown to be up-regulated during gravitropic stimulation
(León and Sánchez-Serrano, 1999). JA was induced by light as well
as involved in photostimulation, where a rice mutant lacking JA
biosynthesis (hebiba) exhibits delayed photodestruction of phy-
tochrome A (Riemann et al., 2009). Furthermore, a study using
hebiba identiﬁed the gene GDSL CONTAINING ENZME RICE 1
(GER1) as playing a role in gravitropic response, as it mirrors the
level of JA in gravity stimulated coleoptiles (Riemann et al., 2007).
The reduction in phytochrome A photodestruction results in an
elevated growth response to red and far-red light. Jasmonates have
also been implicated in growth-mediated response to touch (thig-
motropism) in root tissue, suggesting a role for these compounds
in multiple growth responses in plants (Falkenstein et al., 1991;
Weiler et al., 1993; Stelmach et al., 1998; Blechert et al., 1999).
PHOTOTROPISM
A large part of plant growth and orientation is directed through
the tropisms. Initially when a seed is buried in soil, the seed relies
on the gravitropism to direct its growth in the absence of light.
Once the seedling emerges from the soil, phototropic processes
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 5

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
can further direct the growth of the seedling. The phototropic
response is most often observed in aerial tissues; however, pho-
totropic responses do also occur in roots. Phototropism, which has
been shown to be largely stimulated by blue light (Johnston, 1934;
Kimura and Kagawa, 2006), further helps the plant to attain efﬁ-
cient growth through increased light capture. In response to blue
light, plant shoots generally exhibit positive phototropic response
while plant roots exhibit negative phototropic response (Sakai
et al., 2000; Correll and Kiss, 2002). The phototropic response
evolved early in plant evolution, being present in mosses and ferns
in addition to angiosperms (Suetsugu and Wada, 2007). While
mosses and ferns exhibit phototropic response to red light, pho-
totropic growth in ﬂowering plants is primarily a response to blue
light.
SENSING OF THE LIGHT SIGNAL
In ﬂowering plants, phototropins are specialized photoreceptor
proteins typically located on the plasma membrane that sense blue
light and mediate a phototropic response (Sakamoto and Briggs,
2002). In addition to the blue light response, PHOT1 (Huala et al.,
1997) and PHOT2 (Jarillo et al., 2001; Sakai et al., 2001) regulate
stomatal opening, leaf expansion, and inhibition of stem growth
among other processes (Christie, 2007). In the regulation of pho-
totropism, PHOT1 is the primary photoreceptor, whereas PHOT2
only enacts a response when exposed to high intensities of radia-
tion ﬂuence (Sakai et al., 2001). While PHOT2 plays a small role in
phototropic mediated signaling, this protein has signiﬁcant roles
in other light responses such as chloroplast movements (Wada
et al., 2003) as well as stomatal regulation (Kinoshita et al., 2001).
Upon low light conditions, PHOT2 stimulation causes relocation
of chloroplasts perpendicular to incident irradiation, while high
blue-light stimulation of PHOT2 leads to mobilization of chloro-
plasts away from the edge of the cell to avoid photobleaching of
the organelles (Sakai et al., 2001).
Upon blue-light excitation, PHOT1 and PHOT2 release from
the plasma membrane into the cytoplasm (Sakamoto and Briggs,
2002; Wan et al., 2008), while PHOT2 becomes associated with
the Golgi apparatus (Sakamoto and Briggs, 2002; Kong et al.,
2006). Following excitation with blue light, autophosphorylation
of PHOT1 and PHOT2 leads to phototropin-mediated signaling
(Inoue et al., 2008, 2011). Upon relocalization, PHOT1 has been
shown to associate with clathrin, and is presumed to be internal-
ized through clathrin-mediated endocytosis (Kaiserli et al., 2009).
These studies indicate that phosphorylation and subsequent inter-
nalization of the PHOT1 is required for phototropic response,
however the speciﬁc role PHOT1 and PHOT2 play in signal trans-
duction remains unclear. Curiously, activation of phytochrome A,
which is stimulated by red/far red light, prevents internalization
of PHOT1 and leads to an increased phototropic response (Han
et al., 2008).
In
addition
to
the
phototropins,
there
are
multiple
phototropin-interacting proteins shown to be involved in
phototropism. Like the phototropins, NONPHOTOTROPIC
HYPOCOTYL3 (NPH3) has been shown to localize to the plasma
membrane and to physically interact with PHOT1 (Motchoulski
and Liscum, 1999). In addition, NPH3 is required for pho-
totropic response under both low and high intensity stimulation
with blue light (Motchoulski and Liscum, 1999; Roberts et al.,
2011). However, unlike the phototropins, NPH3 remains mem-
brane associated throughout light stimulation and the phototropic
response. It appears that NPH3 plays a role as a substrate in
ubiquitination of PHOT1 under both low and high blue-light
conditions (Roberts et al., 2011). Under high-blue-light condi-
tions, when the plant is receiving sufﬁcient light for photosynthetic
processes, PHOT1 is poly-ubiquitinated and degraded. How-
ever, under low blue-light conditions, PHOT1 was shown to be
only mono-ubiquitinated, a necessity for initiation of phototropic
response (Roberts et al., 2011).
Another protein found to be involved in phototropism is
ROOT PHOTOTROPISM2 (RPT2). RPT2 has been implicated
in the phototropic response under high blue light conditions,
where mutations in the gene result in defective hypocotyl pho-
totropic response (Sakai et al., 2000). This is due in fact to
RPT2 being transcriptionally regulated by both blue light and
red light in a high-ﬂuency-dependent manner (Sakai et al., 2000).
Like the previously mentioned proteins, RTP2 also localizes
to the plasma membrane of the cell, where it interacts with
both PHOT1 and NPH3 (Inada et al., 2004) It is yet unknown
whether or not RTP2 interacts with Cullin-3 (CUL3), how-
ever, Hohm et al. (2013) have suggested that both NPH3 and
RTP2 could be required for ubiquitination under high blue-light
condition.
TRANSDUCTION OF THE LIGHT SIGNAL AND THE RESPONSE PHASE
Upon sensing a light signal, transduction of that signal must take
place to induce growth in the elongation zones. The classical
Cholodny–Went hypothesis proposes that the differential growth
exhibited by a plant when illuminated with unidirectional light is
a result of differential concentrations of auxin on the illuminated
and shaded sides of the plant (Went and Thimann, 1937). The dif-
ference in auxin content results in cessation of cell growth on the
illuminated side of the plant, while growth continues in the shaded
side, resulting in tropistic movement in the direction of the light.
A later study found that introduction of a physical barrier between
illuminated and shaded sides of maize coleoptiles prevents the for-
mation of an auxin gradient (Briggs, 1963). Using labeled auxin,
Pickard and Thimann (1964) found that auxin moves laterally
across the coleoptile when illuminated with continuous light, as
well as low light dosages. This results in differential growth on
the illuminated and shaded sides of the plant. The differential
concentrations in auxin needed to spur differential growth and
phototropic response are thought to be the result of local and
long-range adaptations in auxin transport (Christie and Murphy,
2013; Hohm et al., 2013).
With the advancement of genetic and molecular techniques,
it is possible to investigate the molecular mechanisms responsi-
ble for phototropic growth. Not surprisingly, similarities between
phototropic stimulated signal transduction and gravitropic stim-
ulated signal transduction have been identiﬁed. Like gravitropic
response, PIN proteins play a signiﬁcant role in auxin efﬂux dur-
ing phototropic response. Five PIN family proteins (PIN1, PIN2,
PIN3, PIN4, and PIN7) reside within the plasma membrane and
appear to facilitate auxin efﬂux during phototropism, with PIN1
and PIN2 functioning as the main efﬂux carriers (Christie and
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 6

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Murphy, 2013). However, mutant screens of the PIN proteins
suggest that all ﬁve contribute to phototropic response under dif-
fering conditions (Christie et al., 2011; Ding et al., 2011; Haga and
Sakai, 2012). These proteins likely play an important role in for-
mation of the lateral auxin gradient, however, it is likely that other
auxin transporters exist to help facilitate in creation of the gradient
(Christie et al., 2011).
Another family of proteins, ATP BINDING CASSETE B
(ABCB) has been implicated in mediating phototropic response
in Arabidopsis. Speciﬁcally, ABCB19 mutants have been shown to
exhibit increased phototropic response (Noh et al., 2003; Kumar
et al.,2011). It has been suggested thatABCB19 acts in concert with
PIN1 to facilitate lateral transport of auxin through stabilization
of PIN1 in the plasma membrane. Loss of function of ABCB19
results in reduced lateral auxin transport arising from the destabi-
lization of PIN1, and the resulting loss of lateral auxin transport
reduces the phototropic response.
In another similarity to gravitropic response, the AUX1 and
LIKE-AUX1 (LAX) family of genes appears to play a role in
inﬂux of auxin and the resulting phototropic response. How-
ever, at the present time, the speciﬁc role of these proteins is
unclear at best. Mutations to the AUX1/LAX genes results in
very subtle loss of phototropic response when mutated alone
(Okada and Shimura, 1992). However, when loss of function
is introduced to AUX1 in combination with LAX2 and LAX3,
reduced phototropic response in hypocotyl occurs (Christie et al.,
2011).
INTERACTION OF LIGHT AND GRAVITY: INSIGHTS OBTAINED
FROM SPACEFLIGHT EXPERIMENTS
As evidenced by the commonalities between gravitropic and pho-
totropic response, it is difﬁcult to untangle the two processes
without escaping the constant gravity vector present during ter-
restrial experiments. Once a phototropic response occurs in the
plant, and differential growth occurs in response to the unidirec-
tional light, a gravitropic response is initiated in reaction to the
new perceived direction of the gravity vector (Okada and Shimura,
1992; Mullen et al., 2000). Special techniques such as rotation on
a clinostat or free fall machines have been used in an attempt to
simulate the effects of microgravity through constantly changing
the gravity vector (Herranz et al., 2013a; Kiss, 2014). For instance,
Zea mays grown on a rotating clinostat had reduced perceived
gravity, which led to an increase in phototropic response (Nick
and Schäfer,1988). An alternative method to measure phototropic
response is to use plants who lack the ability to sense the gravity
vector. Multiple experiments conducted on mutant Arabidopsis
plants lacking starch or amyloplasts displayed a greater magni-
tude of phototropic curvature (Vitha et al., 2000; Ruppel et al.,
2001).
It was not until the advent of spaceﬂight that the effects of
the gravity vector could be reduced and the decoupling of pho-
totropism and gravitropism could be studied. Plants grown on
the Space Shuttle or the International Space Station (ISS) provide
the opportunity to observe phototropic response in conditions of
microgravity. For instance, it has been revealed that in conditions
of microgravity, amyloplasts do not distribute randomly through-
out the statocyte, suggesting there is a connection between the
amyloplasts and the cytoskeleton (Perbal et al., 1997; Smith et al.,
1997; Driss-Ecole et al., 2000).
Experiments performed in low earth orbit aboard a Space
Shuttle have been utilized to provide support for the starch-
statolith hypothesis for gravity perception (Kiss et al., 1998b,
1999). Wild-type and starchless mutants grown in a micrograv-
ity environment, as well as in a centrifuge present aboard the
shuttle that simulated 1g conditions, revealed that increased
starch content increases the magnitude of gravitropic response.
Studies on the ISS have been utilized to characterize a novel posi-
tive phototropic response to red light in Arabidopsis hypocotyls
(Millar et al., 2010,
Kiss et al., 2012).
A similar phototropic
response has previously been discovered in Arabidopsis roots by
using specialized instrumentation on Earth (Kiss et al., 2003),
however, conditions of microgravity revealed a much more
robust response. These results suggest that ﬂowering plants such
as Arabidopsis have retained a red light phototropic response
that is present in more ancient plant lineages such as ferns
and mosses. However, it was also revealed that small frac-
tional conditions (0.1–0.3 g) were enough to alternate the red-
light phototropic response (Kiss et al., 2012). Interestingly, the
phototropic response to blue-light stimulation also exhibits an
exaggerated response in microgravity conditions (Millar et al.,
2010).
In addition to signal perception, it is possible that micrograv-
ity environments affect the signal transduction of gravitropism as
well. Evidence suggests that signaling via Ca2+ is hampered by
microgravity environments (Ferl et al., 2002). Expression patterns
of an alcohol dehydrogenase::β-glucuronidase (Adh::GUS) trans-
gene could only be replicated when treated with Ca2+ inhibitors
(Paul et al., 2001). It also has been found that other processes
that utilize Ca2+ such as cell wall architecture, speciﬁcally lignin
biosynthesis, is hampered during spaceﬂight (Cowles et al., 1994;
Sato et al., 1999). Taken together, these studies suggest that signal
transduction as well as perception are affected by conditions of
microgravity.
While the microgravity conditions obtained during space-
ﬂight offer a unique environment for understanding the interplay
between gravitropism and phototropism, it also provides the abil-
ity to study plant growth and development in fractional or reduced
gravity environments (Kiss, 2014). Gravity environments similar
to those experienced on the moon or Mars can provide insight into
the future plant growth that is required for long-range spaceﬂight
and/or colonization of other celestial bodies. Continued exper-
iments aboard the ISS (Kiss et al., 2014) will allow for a better
understanding of the relationships between gravitropism and pho-
totropism which will be experienced by plants grown by future
colonization of other planets.
GRAVITY AND LIGHT EFFECTS ON MERISTEMATIC CELL
FUNCTIONS
CELL PROLIFERATION AND GROWTH IN THE ROOT MERISTEM
INFLUENCE PLANT DEVELOPMENT
All adult plants contain meristematic tissues, composed by pop-
ulations of undifferentiated, totipotent cells with a high capacity
of cell proliferation and cell growth. Any specialized tissue can be
formed from meristems at any time in the life of the plant. Indeed,
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 7

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
plant growth and development, which rely on cellular functions,
greatly depend on the balance between cell proliferation and cell
differentiation that exists in meristems, which is controlled, in
turn, by hormones, among them auxin playing a central role
(Perrot-Rechenmann, 2010).
Regulators of plant growth and differentiation (i.e., differ-
entiation and developmental signals) are capable of activating
key modulators of cell growth and cell division in a coordi-
nated manner in meristems. Therefore, cell growth and cell
proliferation are closely interconnected to one another and this
coordination is called “meristematic competence” (Mizukami,
2001).
The concept of cell proliferation is intimately linked to the
existence of the cell division cycle, or simply the cell cycle. Prolif-
erating cells grow, duplicate DNA and divide in a cyclic manner.
The process is strictly regulated at two speciﬁc checkpoints, the
ﬁrst of them at the transition G1/S, allowing DNA replication
to proceed, and the second at the transition G2/M, in which
the ability of cells to divide is checked. Speciﬁc proteins called
cyclins, and speciﬁc cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play essen-
tial roles in these regulatory processes (De Veylder et al., 2003).
The concept of cell growth mostly affects the production of cell
biomass, essentially proteins, so it is largely determined by the
activity of RNA polymerase I, which controls ribosomal RNA
synthesis and ribosome biogenesis (Baserga, 2007). It has been
largely established, in particular for plants, that the rate of ribo-
some biogenesis can be estimated through certain features of the
molecular cytology of the nucleolus (Medina et al., 2000; Shaw
and Doonan, 2005; Sáez-Vásquez and Medina, 2008). Further-
more, regulation of ribosome production is controlled by a subset
of nucleolar proteins, among which nucleolin is, a protein con-
served in animals, plants and yeast, whose levels are correlated
with the rate of functional activity of the nucleolus (Ginisty et al.,
1999; González-Camacho and Medina, 2006; Pontvianne et al.,
2007).
In this context, it is widely known that environmental condi-
tions modulate meristematic activities, directly or indirectly, at
different levels of regulation (Komaki and Sugimoto, 2012). Since
many factors involved in light and gravity sensing are also acting
in regulating cell cycle and ribosome biogenesis, it is interest-
ing to review how these fundamental environmental factors affect
plant development by affecting the regulation of these cellular
processes.
EFFECTS OF ALTERED GRAVITY ON CELL PROLIFERATION AND GROWTH
The inﬂuence of gravity on meristematic cell functions has been
approached up to now in a relatively small number of experiments
performed in space and in ground-based devices of simulated
microgravity (Herranz et al., 2013a). In early pioneering studies
on plant space biology it was reported an increase of mitotic
index of lentil roots grown was found in microgravity (Darbel-
ley et al., 1986). The interpretation was not unequivocal, since
this effect could be due either to a shortening of the interphase
or to a lengthening of mitosis. In a further study on board of
Spacelab (IML-1 Mission), also using lentil seedlings, a lower
mitotic index was shown in root cortical cells of samples grown in
space, but no apparent perturbations in the mitosis were observed
(Driss-Ecole et al., 1994). In the same work, the authors observed
that microgravity promoted the arrest in the G2 phase of the cell
cycle. All these experiments were performed with a relatively short
exposure of plants to microgravity (28–29 h). In lentil seedlings
grown for 30 h in microgravity, the progression of cell cycle was
modiﬁed, even though the cell elongation did not appear affected
(Legué et al., 1996; Yu et al., 1999). The densitometric analysis
of nuclear DNA content of meristematic cells from roots grown
in microgravity showed a decrease in the proportion of cells in S
phase correlated with an increased proportion of cells in G1 phase,
suggesting that the G1/S transition of the cell cycle is modulated
by gravity.
The ﬁrst European experiment on plant biology on board the
ISS revealed that one of the most relevant effects of altered gravity
is the disruption of the meristematic competence in cells of the
rootapicalmeristem(Matíaet al.,2005,2010). Undermicrogravity
conditions, cell proliferation and cell growth appear uncoupled,
losing their coordinated progress which is characteristic of these
cells under normal ground gravity conditions.
Further experiments performed on ground-based facilities for
microgravity simulation, including sequential sampling at dif-
ferent growth times and the analysis of gene expression, have
conﬁrmed the uncoupling of cell proliferation and ribosome bio-
genesis caused by altered gravity, showing that the weightlessness
environment is a stress condition for plant proliferating cells. The
effects of the gravitational stress are detected from the very begin-
ning of germination, in 2-day-old seedlings (Matía et al., 2009;
Herranz et al., 2013b; Manzano et al., 2013). The enhanced cell
proliferation rate is not accompanied by an increase in the lev-
els of cyclin B1, a regulator of the G2/M transition, as would be
the normal in ground gravity, but, on the contrary, these lev-
els appear depleted. At the same time, a lower cellular growth
was observed, since ribosomes, the cellular factories of proteins,
were produced at a lower rate. This depletion of ribosome bio-
genesis was already observed in meristematic root cells grown in
simulated microgravity (Shen-Miller and Hinchman, 1995; Sobol
et al., 2005, 2006), but it was not put in relation to other cel-
lular processes. Since cyclin B1 is synthesized in the G2 phase
of the cell cycle, and also this period is the most active in
ribosome production (Sáez-Vásquez and Medina, 2008), a short-
ening of G2 phase is compatible with the mentioned observed
uncoupling. The causes of this shortening could be found in a
failure or malfunction of the cell size checkpoint which imme-
diately precedes mitosis (De Schutter et al., 2007; González et al.,
2007).
Whereas the effects of the lack of detection of a gravity vector
on meristematic cells have been clearly identiﬁed, we still need to
elucidate the factor triggering the cascade of functional events that
eventually result in the alteration of meristematic cell proliferation
and growth and in the disruption of meristematic competence.
According to previously published data, the change in the hor-
monal signaling pathway mediated by the auxin polar transport
could be a possible candidate to play this triggering role (Medina
and Herranz, 2010).
It has been demonstrated that auxin plays a fundamental role
in the connection between stimuli perceived by the plant and the
cellular responses to them (Muday and Murphy, 2002). As stated
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 8

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
above, mechanical sensing of a gravity change by columella cells
is converted into a relocation of PIN proteins, ﬁnally resulting
in changes in the auxin gradient in the root (Friml et al., 2002;
Kleine-Vehn et al., 2010). There are experimental results showing
that this change in the gradient is associated with the inhibition
of the auxin polar transport, at least partially (Hoshino et al.,
2007; Boucheron-Dubuisson et al., submitted). Auxin inﬂuences
multiple aspects of plant growth and development, including the
regulation of cell cycle progression and the coordination between
cell growth and cell division (David et al., 2007; Jurado et al., 2010;
Perrot-Rechenmann, 2010). Therefore, all available data point to
auxin as the key mediator between altered gravity sensing and the
observed effects on root meristematic cells (Medina and Herranz,
2010; Figure 3).
Since gravity can be considered as an abiotic component of the
environment, it would be interesting to consider to what extent
the response to gravity alteration follows a similar pattern as
the response to other abiotic stresses, or, in the case of gravity,
whether plants have developed speciﬁc mechanisms of defense
and/or adaptation. It is widely known that abiotic stresses, such
as thermal shock (heat or cold), drought or saline stress, usually
cause arrest of the cell cycle on actively proliferating cells (Sacks
et al., 1997; Burssens et al., 2000; West et al., 2004; De Veylder et al.,
2007; Doerner, 2008; Komaki and Sugimoto, 2012). In the case
of gravitational stress, the cycle is not arrested, but the regulation
is severely affected through the failure of the G2/M checkpoint,
which allows cells to enter mitosis before a critical size is reached.
Apparently this scenario results in an increase of cell proliferation,
FIGURE 3 | Schematic view of the factors involved in the response of
meristematic cells to the alteration of the environmental gravity
sensing in conditions of microgravity and the possible counteracting
effect of light irradiation, particularly red light. Under normal gravity
conditions, the gravity vector is sensed in statocytes of the root cap
(“professional” cells), and the signal is transduced through the regulation
of the auxin polar transport in the root. In meristematic cells, auxin
regulates meristematic competence through its interaction with a number
of growth coordinators appearing in the ﬁgure (nucleolin is a regulator of
ribosome biogenesis which interacts, in turn, with cell cycle regulators;
E2FB is a member of a family of transcription factors, regulated by auxin,
which induces cell proliferation and growth; cyclins and cyclin-dependent
kinases (CDKs) are major elements of cell cycle checkpoints controlling
DNA replication and entry into mitosis). In addition, other mechanisms of
gravity sensing and transduction must exist in “non-professional” cells,
i.e., cells not specialized in gravity sensing, and, eventually, promote a
similar response in meristematic/proliferating cells, as inferred from the
results obtained in biological systems devoid of statocytes and statoliths.
These mechanisms are poorly known at present. In
microgravity conditions, auxin polar transport is inhibited, at least partially,
auxin levels are high at meristems and growth coordinators are, in general,
down regulated. The response is the disruption of meristematic
competence in proliferating cells. Photoactivation by light (especially by red
light), sensed and mediated by phytochromes (especially PHYB), is known
to produce down regulation of auxin responsive genes and upregulation of
many growth coordinators in meristematic cells, by means of direct and/or
indirect mechanisms. These effects may counteract the gravitational stress
in root meristematic cells in conditions of microgravity. Red arrows indicate
down regulation, black arrows indicate up regulation and blue arrow
indicates unknown effect.
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 9

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
but the daughter cells resulting from these divisions are abnormal,
due to a reduced size.
Regarding the long-term consequences of these alterations, it
could be foreseen that they could be dramatic for the plant sur-
vival, due to a serious impairment of plant development caused
by the loss of meristematic competence. However, the reality is
that plants ﬁnally are capable of surviving in space, even though
some features of adult plants are not normal (Miyamoto et al.,
1999; Link et al., 2003; Wolverton and Kiss, 2009). This observa-
tion suggests that plants would be capable of implementing some
countermeasures against the gravitational stress, leading to some
sort of adaptation or acclimation to the weightlessness environ-
ment, but the molecular processes and mechanisms involved in
this presumed adaptation process are unknown at present. Indeed
the genomic and transcriptomic data available on the speciﬁc cell
cycle regulators whose expression is affected by gravity alteration
are very scarce and limited to those scarce studies in which the
analyzed material was enriched in proliferating cells, such as the
root tip (Kimbrough et al.,2004). Therefore, the identiﬁcation and
discrimination of genes and proteins involved in cell proliferation
and cell cycle playing a role in the response to gravitational stress
is one of the most attractive challenges of space plant biology for
the near future (Figure 3). Dedicated transcriptomic/proteomic
studies using isolated meristems and/or proliferating in vitro cul-
tured cells will be necessary to ﬁnd accurate solutions to this
problem.
GRAVITY SENSING AND TRANSDUCTION IN “NON-PROFESSIONAL”
CELLS
Whereas the role of auxin appears to be clear in connecting
the alterations found in meristematic cells with the gravitropic
response, it does not provide an explanation to the alterations
found in cellular systems devoid of cells specialized in gravity
sensing, such as in vitro cultured cells. A response to mechan-
ical signals by these cells, in which the perception mechanism is
unknown,has been reported in both plant and animal cells (Cogoli
and Cogoli-Greuter, 1997; Kordyum, 1997; Dai et al., 2007). In
plants, an altered gravity environment (including spaceﬂight)
has been shown to induce transcriptomic and proteomic effects
of on Arabidopsis callus cell cultures (Martzivanou et al., 2006;
Barjaktarovic et al., 2009; Manzano et al., 2012; Paul et al., 2012;
Hausmann et al., 2013). These cellular systems do not show any
type of gravitropism, and cultured cells are not integrated in any
organism possessing specialized mechanisms for gravity sensing.
In this sense,cultured cells can be considered as“non-professional”
cells (Van Loon, 2007). Regarding the effects of altered gravity on
cell growth and proliferation parameters in this kind of cellular
system, no speciﬁc reports have been published yet, but prelimi-
nary results indicate that the alterations are quite similar to those
found on meristems (Herranz and Medina, 2014 and unpublished
data).
Interestingly, whereas functional alterations on undifferenti-
ated cells grown in microgravity were similar either in meris-
tematic cells from seedlings or in cultured cells, transcriptomic
changes were substantially different from seedlings or callus cul-
tures (Paul et al., 2012). This suggests a specialized response by
different cell types, such that both meristems and cell cultures
would share the condition of being homogeneous populations
of undifferentiated proliferating cells, whereas each seedling is
composed by a heterogeneous collection of differentiated cells,
differing in function, structure, and gene expression.
An intermediate case between gravitropic seedling roots and
in vitro cell cultures is provided by seedling roots exposed to mag-
netic levitation (Manzano et al., 2013). In this case, root cells are
subjected to the levitation force caused by the diamagnetic lev-
itation of water, which counteracts the force due to gravity but
it is not capable of inducing any displacement of statoliths. The
response at the meristematic cell level is the disruption of meris-
tematic competence associated to an altered polar auxin transport.
This means that there should be an intermediate factor, indepen-
dent of statoliths, capable of linking the signal sensed in the cell
and the alteration of the polar auxin transport.
Therefore, depending on the type of cell, gravity sensing may or
may not involve statolith movement and, consequently it may or
may not produce gravitropic effects; furthermore, the transduc-
tion of the signal may or may not affect the polar auxin transport.
In all cases, both in planta and in vitro, the response of undif-
ferentiated proliferating cells to the perception of the lack of a
gravity vector is an alteration in growth and proliferation capa-
ble of disrupting meristematic competence. It is conceivable that
different mechanisms of gravity sensing and signal transduction
(within a cell or throughout cells) involving different molecular
and cellular players and mediators may exist in different bio-
logical systems and even co-exist in a biological model (plants
or cell cultures; real or simulated microgravity; mechanical; or
magnetic simulation). The nature and the localization of the
mechanosensor in “non-professional” cells was hypothesized to
be related to the membrane-cytoskeleton associations (Van Loon,
2007). There is a process, called gravity resistance, which is the
capacity of plants to resist the gravity force by developing rigid
structures, whose cellular basis is the existence of mechanosensi-
tive ion channels at the plasma membrane and the reorientation
of cortical microtubules (Hoson et al., 2005, 2010). This mecha-
nism of gravity sensing is compatible with the available data on
graviresponse in “non-professional” cells and may represent an
initial explanation, which does not exclude the need of dedicated
investigation (Figure 3). Furthermore, it has been proposed that
cells outside the cap root area are capable of producing a partial
gravitropic response in maize (Wolverton et al., 2002; Mancuso
et al., 2006).
An alternative (or complementary) mechanism of gravity
sensing, not directly related to columella cells, is the protoplast-
pressure hypothesis, already mentioned and discussed in a
preceding section of this paper.
INFLUENCE OF LIGHT STIMULATION ON MERISTEMATIC CELL
FUNCTIONS
Light signaling and plant development
From the different environmental factors which inﬂuence the life
of plants on Earth, light via photosynthesis is ultimately the sole
energy source for plant growth. Therefore, linking growth control
to light signaling, at least during the most crucial developmen-
tal events, is essential for the most efﬁcient use of energy and
in order to guarantee success in plant growth and development.
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 10

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Consequently, light regulates many physiological processes related
to plant development, starting by the earliest of them, namely seed
germination and seedling morphogenesis (photomorphogenesis).
This means that light plays speciﬁc roles in the activation and reg-
ulation of the cellular and molecular functions constituting the
basis of these physiological processes, e.g., cell proliferation and
cell growth.
Multiple parameters of the ambient light signal can be sensed
by plants, such as light quantity (ﬂuence), quality (wavelength),
direction, and duration. The particular effect of the light direc-
tion and wavelength on establishing and modulating the growth
direction of the plant and of the plant organs is the fundament
of phototropism, which has been thoroughly analyzed in a pre-
vious section of this paper, in the presence and in the absence of
gravity.
It has been demonstrated that a signiﬁcant portion of the
genome shows differential expression between seedlings that are
exposed to light and those that grow in darkness (Ma et al., 2001).
The consequence is that many biochemical pathways, located
throughout various subcellular organelles, in different cell types,
are coordinately regulated by light. Thus, light ultimately con-
trols the key mechanisms driving plant development, such as
seed germination and seedling photomorphogenesis (Jiao et al.,
2007). Seedling development is indeed quite different depend-
ing on whether it proceeds in the presence or in the absence
of light. Seedling development in the dark is called skotomor-
phogenesis, or etiolation, whereas development under light is
called photomorphogenesis, or de-etiolation. The morphology
of etiolated and light-grown seedlings shows marked differences
affecting the length of hypocotyls (shorter under photomorpho-
genesis), the size and morphology of cotyledons (smaller and
closed under etiolation, with apical hooks) and the type of plas-
tids and the presence of chlorophyll in them (chloroplasts versus
etioplasts).
Furthermore, different metabolic pathways and cellular mech-
anisms show variable sensitivity to light signals of distinct qualities
(Ma et al., 2001; Molas and Kiss, 2009). Phytochromes (PHY)
constitute a family of proteins whose different members medi-
ate the developmental responses to the different qualities of
light, by exhibiting differential photosensory capabilities. In ﬂow-
ering plants, the PHY gene family consists of ﬁve members
(PHYA-E; Molas and Kiss, 2009). From them, PHYA is the recep-
tor of monochromatic far-red light, whereas responsiveness to
monochromatic red light is predominantly attributed to PHYB
(Tepperman et al., 2004).
Phytochromes are regulators of changes in gene expression
induced in response to light sensing. The regulatory mecha-
nism involves the activation of transcriptional networks, including
a collection of transcription factors. Some of these transcrip-
tion factors are regulated by just one type of light (wavelength),
whereas many more respond to a wide spectrum of light (Jiao
et al., 2007). A well-characterized, light-responsive element (LRE)
is G-Box (Weisshaar et al., 1991; Hornitschek et al., 2012). The
afﬁnity of different factors for binding G-Box is modulated by
post-translationalmechanismssuchasphosphorylation. Thecases
of G-BOX BINDING FACTOR 1 (GBF1) and COMMON PLANT
REGULATORY FACTOR 2 (CPRF2) are representative of this
mechanism. Both factors are phosphorylated by casein kinase II
(CK2) to enable G-Box binding and promote the expression of
photomorphogenesis genes in response to red light irradiation.
In the case of CPRF2 phosphorylation, red light induces ﬁrst its
translocation to the nucleus, where it is then phosphorylated and
bound to G-Box for promoting gene expression (Wellmer et al.,
1999).
Other key elements driving the transcriptional change induced
by light sensing are the members of a subfamily of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) phytochrome-interacting transcription
factors, which have been designated PIFs (phytochrome inter-
acting factors). PIFs selectively interact with the Pfr form of
phytochromes, i.e., the photoactivated form already translo-
cated to the cell nucleus. Different PIFs speciﬁcally interact with
different phytochromes, and they deﬁne direct links between
photoreceptors and transcriptional regulation. The analysis of
several mutants of PIFs related to PHYB-mediated red light
signaling shows phenotypes characterized by short hypocotyls
and without any perturbation of light-induced expression of
marker genes for chloroplast development.
These observa-
tions indicate that these PIFs are negative regulators of PHYB
signaling pathway (Huq and Quail, 2002) since they repress
seedling photomorphogenesis in the dark (Leivar et al., 2008).
Recent studies have revealed that PIFs are targeted for rapid
degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway by photo-
activated phytochromes in light (Leivar and Quail, 2011). A
similar role can be attributed to PIFs interacting with other
phytochromes.
Many genes have been identiﬁed as being regulated by PIFs.
In turn, PIF activity is regulated by different pathways and fac-
tors, including various hormonal signals (reviewed by de Lucas
and Prat, 2014). A recent study has provided evidence of the
involvement of an evolutionarily conserved non-coding RNA in
the modulation of red-light mediated photomorphogenesis by
direct interaction with PIF3 gene transcription (Wang et al.,2014).
Collectively, these results suggest that the PIF family functions
as a cellular signaling hub in the phytochrome-mediated path-
way controlling seedling photomorphogenesis (Leivar and Quail,
2011).
Light signaling is related to auxin signaling
Among the pathways regulated by phytochromes and PIFs, the
interaction with hormone signaling, especially auxin, is of spe-
cial interest. Indeed, multiple hormonal pathways are modulated
by light to mediate the developmental changes and, conversely,
hormone levels also serve as endogenous cues in inﬂuencing light
responsiveness. In particular, a cross-talk has been shown to exist
between PHYB-regulated responses to light signaling and hor-
mone signaling. Mutants impaired in the synthesis or response
to gibberellin (GA), brassinosteroids (BR) or auxin suppress the
constitutive elongation phenotype of phyB mutants and cause de-
etiolated growth in the dark (Alabadí et al., 2004; Nemhauser
and Chory, 2004). The ﬁnding that PIFs play a direct role in
the activation of auxin biosynthesis (Hornitschek et al., 2012) has
provided a functional link between these different pathways and
their integration to coordinate plant growth and development
(Figure 3).
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 11

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
In addition, it is known that light regulates the expression of
some PIN genes,encoding proteins responsible for the auxin efﬂux
during the transport of this hormone. Enhanced auxin transport
by these efﬂux carriers was reported to mediate the differential
elongation of cells in the apical hook (Žádníková et al., 2010;
Abbas et al., 2013) as well as during the shade avoidance response
(Keuskamp et al., 2010).
Apart from PIFs, the transcription factor long hypocotyl 5
(HY5) is a convergence point of light and multiple hormone sig-
naling pathways, such as GA, cytokinin, auxin and abscisic acid
(Lau and Deng, 2010). Earlier studies have suggested that HY5
plays a role in suppressing auxin signaling (Cluis et al., 2004), a
function which is performed through the activation of its negative
regulators. A genome survey of the targets of HY5, using chro-
matin immunoprecipitation identiﬁed potential auxin signaling
targets, including a dozen of auxin responsive factors (ARFs; Lee
et al., 2007).
This relationship of light signaling with hormone signaling may
have consequences in establishing the coordination of the growth
of different plant organs. It is evident that changes in the environ-
mentalconditionsdonotaffectthegrowthof allorgansinthesame
manner, and, even within a given organ, not all cell types respond
equally. Auxin is the most likely candidate to play the coordinator
role, assuring balanced responses and equilibrated growth. The
integration of the PIF regulatory network in these functions is
crucial to drive the differential growth rates of the various plant
organs during development and to provide plants with adaptation
ﬂexibility (de Lucas and Prat, 2014).
Light signaling controls cell cycle
One of the most striking characteristics of seedling photomor-
phogenesis is that the same light signal evokes largely different and
sometimes opposite responses in different cells, tissues and organs.
Thus,theresponsetolightsignalingiscellexpansionincotyledons,
repression of growth in the hypocotyl and cell division and growth
in meristems (Nemhauser,2008). Regarding meristem activity,cell
cycle progression in these cells is under the control of photorecep-
tors, as shown after monitoring a collection of mutants defective
in phytochromes and cryptochromes (López-Juez et al.,2008). For
this control, light initiates several hormonal responses associated
with meristem function, among them auxin and cytokinin. A key
role in this process is played by two central cell cycle regulators, the
E2FB and E2FC transcription factors (Magyar et al., 2005; Jurado
et al., 2007; Figure 3).
The investigation on the regulation of cell division by photore-
ceptors is less extensive compared to the research efforts devoted
to other photomorphogenetic processes, such as cell elongation
and greening. However, the most signiﬁcant result that triggered
the investigation on this topic was the observation that the growth
of the shoot apex (meristem) is repressed in darkness but becomes
rapidly activated by light (López-Juez et al., 2008). Light triggers
the rapid downregulation of expression for speciﬁc transcription
factors and genes, which leads to the loss of repressors that had
been active in the dark. In this process, light also initiates rapid
hormonal responses in the shoot apex.
Auxin levels are high in the shoot apical meristem in the dark.
A large collection of auxin-responsive genes is highly expressed
in the shoot apex in the dark and rapidly downregulated by light
(Figure 3), indicating that increased auxin concentration and/or
responsiveness could be part of the repressive mechanism of
meristemfunctioninthedark. Theauxin-responsivetranscription
factor HAT4 was identiﬁed as an early red light-repressed gene in
etiolated seedlings (Tepperman et al., 2004). On the contrary, the
expression of the auxin transporter gene PIN1 was shown to be
upregulatedbylightintheshootapex. However,theseresultscould
be due to direct the auxin ﬂow away from the meristem upon light
exposure (López-Juez et al., 2008).
At a later point after light activation, coinciding with leaf pri-
mordial development, a distinct cohort of auxin upregulated genes
are expressed. This determines two stages of the auxin response
to light: an early stage, associated with cell cycle activity, charac-
terized by a drop of expression, and a later stage, associated with
differentiation, characterized by elevation. Contrary to the results
with auxin, cytokinin- and GA-responsive genes are activated by
light (López-Juez et al., 2008).
During the light activation of meristem development, genes
involvedinribosomebiogenesisandproteintranslationarerapidly
and synchronously induced, simultaneously with cell proliferation
genes, such as B-type CDKs, some A-type cyclins and, slightly
later, a group of D-, A-, and B-type cyclins (López-Juez et al., 2008;
Figure 3). A similar program of gene expression was described
for the process of activation of cell division of the root meristem
that drives seed germination (Masubelele et al., 2005). The differ-
ence, as inferred from the particular genes, which are activated
in each case, is that in root dormant seeds, cells are arrested in
G1, whereas in the dark cells are arrested both at G1- and G2-
phases. In any case, the synchronic expression of genes regulating
cell growth and cell proliferation conﬁrms that the coordination
of these two processes (meristematic competence) is essential for
the meristem function (Mizukami, 2001; Medina and Herranz,
2010).
In relation to the observed coordinated regulation of cell cycle
genes, it was reported that light affected the levels of the E2F
transcription factor family, constituted by transcriptional regula-
tors playing important roles in the entry into cell proliferation or
differentiation. Light increased the levels of E2FB (Figure 3) and
decreased the levels of E2FC (López-Juez et al.,2008). E2FB is asso-
ciated with the regulation of cell proliferation at the two main cell
cycle regulatory events, namely the G1-to-S and the G2-to-mitosis
checkpoints. The turnover of the E2FB factor is regulated by auxin,
which induces the expression of the gene (Magyar et al., 2005). On
the contrary, E2FC is a negative regulator of cell proliferation
(Gutierrez, 2005). The effect of light on E2F transcription factors
is dependent on DET (DEETIOLATED) and COP (CONSTITU-
TIVELY PHOTOMORPHOGENIC) factors, which are essential
for the maintenance of skotomorphogenesis in the dark (Møller
et al., 2002).
In addition to the role played in E2FB turnover, auxin mediates
the light signaling effects on cell cycle by responding to changes
in the red:far red light ratio. A reduction in this ratio causes
arrest of cell cycle progression by inducing the expression of the
TIR1 (TRANSPORT INHIBITOR RESPONSE 1) gene, involved in
auxin transport, and of CKX6 (CITOKININ OXIDASE 6), which
reduces the cytokinin levels (Carabelli et al., 2007).
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 12

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Finally, an indirect pathway of cell cycle regulation by light,
especially affecting the root meristem, is based on the deple-
tion of sugars caused by the lack of light and the inhibition of
photosynthesis (Nishihama and Kohchi, 2013). It was shown that
the supply of glucose can reactivate the root meristem (Kircher
and Schopfer, 2012). In fact, glucose was shown to activate the
TOR (TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN) gene, which, in turn, activates
E2FA transcription factor to promote expressions of S-phase genes
(Xiong et al., 2013). Moreover, the nucleolar protein nucleolin,
which activates ribosome biogenesis in connection to mechanisms
of cell cycle regulation, is induced by glucose and sucrose (Kojima
et al., 2007) Thus, the light signal perceived by leaves is trans-
mitted by photosynthesis-derived sugars to the root meristem,
where they activate cell cycle via different pathways, such as the
TOR-E2FA.
Red light stimulates factors promoting meristematic competence
More than a decade before the literature reported in the preceding
section on the light control of cell proliferation, a series of papers
originated from the laboratory of Stanley J. Roux clearly demon-
strated that light stimuli responsible for photomorphogenesis have
activating effects on different factors promoting cell growth and
proliferation and their mutual coordination, that is, what has been
called meristematic competence.
Phytochrome-stimulating red light irradiation is capable of
increasing the phosphorylation of nuclear proteins promoted by
Ca2+ and calmodulin, an effect generally related to an increase in
gene expression (Datta et al., 1985). Furthermore, it was shown
that a red-light pulse given to dark-grown seedlings resulted in
increasing the cell proliferation activity (i.e., the mitotic index)
and in the expression of some relevant nucleolar proteins involved
inribosomebiogenesis,andinparticular,of anucleolin-likenucle-
olar protein gene, indicating an increase in the rate of production
of ribosomes in the nucleolus (Tong et al., 1997; Reichler et al.,
2001; Figure 3).
CONCLUDING REMARKS AND PERSPECTIVES
Disruption of meristematic competence appears to be a general
effect produced by the lack of sensing of a deﬁned gravity vec-
tor on undifferentiated proliferating cells of plants, regardless of
whether they are meristematic cells from seedlings, or in vitro cul-
tured cells. These results pose two important challenges. The ﬁrst
is the need of obtaining additional information on sensing, trans-
duction and response mechanisms in the different model systems
in order to establish the single or multiple pathways involved.
The second is to search for countermeasures which could allow
overcoming the gravitational stress on board space vehicles and
in environments featuring gravity levels different from the Earth
nominal levels.
With respect to the ﬁrst challenge, the current extent of our
knowledge is schematically summarized in Figure 3. Aspects of
the details of these pathways remain unknown due to the lack of
experimental data; however, these unknowns provide a summary
of the research challenges on this topic in a near future. Thus, we
will need to keep exploring altered gravity effects in cell cultures
in order to uncover the details of mechanisms of the alteration
of meristematic competence, and their potential dependence on
auxin and/or on gravitropism-specialized organelles. In addition,
further spaceﬂight missions are required to conﬁrm these ﬁndings
by using different mutants affecting auxin-responsive elements as
well as cell proliferation and cell growth markers, e.g., nucleolin
mutants.
Regarding the second challenge, the activating effect of light
(particularly red illumination) can be of help in restoring meris-
tematic competence under microgravity conditions (Figure 3).
The factors which have been shown to be enhanced as a result
of phytochrome-mediated photostimulation coincide with those
which have been found to be decoupled under gravitational stress,
producing the disruption of meristematic competence. In general,
many points remain unknown in this cross-talk among different
signals (light, gravity), mediators (auxin) and cellular effects (cell
proliferation/cell cycle and cell growth/ribosome biogenesis). It
is possible that the light stimulus, either alone or in combina-
tion with the alteration of gravity, could induce a redistribution
of the auxin gradients in the root, which may be different from
that produced by the alteration of gravity. The consequence at
the cellular level could be a rate of cell proliferation and ribo-
some biogenesis which may reach similar levels as those existing
on Earth.
Thus, in our upcoming experiments (termed the Seedling
Growth Project) on the ISS, we aim to understand how gravity
and light responses inﬂuence each other and to better under-
standthecellularsignalingmechanismsinvolvedinplanttropisms.
Through these experiments, the red-light-dependent phototropic
response in ﬂowering plants will be further characterized. In addi-
tion, these experiments will consider the combined inﬂuence of
light and gravity on plant development through the identiﬁcation
of changes in the mechanisms and regulation of root meristem-
atic cell growth and proliferation. Auxin transport and perception
will be analyzed as a regulatory process of these cellular func-
tions, which also affects the developmental pattern of the plant.
Experiments will test whether red light stimulation is capable of
counteracting the effects of the gravitational stress on cell growth
and proliferation. Finally, thresholds of response in fractional
gravity will be measured to determine whether the red-light effect
on blue-light-based phototropism is a direct or indirect effect. In
the long term, experiments in fractional gravity produced by a
centrifuge on the ISS will be performed to improve the under-
standing of how plants will grow and develop on the Moon and
Mars.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Joshua P. Vandenbrink, John Z. Kiss, Raul Herranz, and F. Javier
Medina all had substantial contributions to the design of the work,
have participated in the writing of the manuscript critically for
intellectual content, approve the ﬁnal version to be published, and
agree to be accountable for the work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support was provided by the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration through grants NNX10AM86G and
NNX12AO65G to John Z. Kiss. Financial support to F. Javier
Medina and Raul Herranz was provided by the Spanish “Plan
Nacional de Investigación Cientíﬁca, Desarrollo Tecnológico e
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 13

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Innovación” Grant Ref. No. AYA2012-33982, and by European
SpaceAgency, Program“Access to Ground Based Facilities,”Grants
Ref. Nos. 4200022650 and 4000105761.
REFERENCES
Abbas, M., Alabadí, D., and Blázquez, M. A. (2013). Differential growth at the apical
hook: all roads lead to auxin. Front. Plant Sci. 4:441. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00441
Alabadí, D., Gil, J., Blázquez, M. A., and García-Martínez, J. L. (2004). Gibberellins
repress photomorphogenesis in darkness. Plant Physiol. 134, 1050–1057. doi:
10.1104/pp.103.035451
Bacon, F., and Sylvarum, S. (1627). A Natural History. Ten Centuries (London,
Thomas Lee, 1676; ﬁrst published in 1627), 107–110.
Baluška, F., and Hasenstein, K. (1997). Root cytoskeleton: its role in perception of
and response to gravity. Planta 203, S69–S78. doi: 10.1007/PL00008117
Band, L. R., Wells, D. M., Fozard, J. A., Ghetiu, T., French, A. P., Pound, M. P., et al.
(2014). Systems analysis of auxin transport in the Arabidopsis root apex. Plant
Cell 26, 862–875. doi: 10.1105/tpc.13.119495
Band, L. R., Wells, D. M., Larrieu, A., Sun, J., Middleton, A. M., French, A. P.,
et al. (2012). Root gravitropism is regulated by a transient lateral auxin gradient
controlled by a tipping-point mechanism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 4668–
4673. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1201498109
Barjaktarovic, Z., Schutz, W., Madlung, J., Fladerer, C., Nordheim, A., and Hampp,
R. (2009). Changes in the effective gravitational ﬁeld strength affect the state
of phosphorylation of stress-related proteins in callus cultures of Arabidopsis
thaliana. J. Exp. Bot. 60, 779–789. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern324
Barlow, P. (1995).
Gravity perception in plants: a multiplicity of systems
derived by evolution? Plant Cell Environ. 18, 951–962. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
3040.1995.tb00606.x
Baserga,
R. (2007).
Is cell size important?
Cell Cycle 6,
814–816.
doi:
10.4161/cc.6.7.4049
Baster, P., Robert, S., Kleine-Vehn, J., Vanneste, S., Kania, U., Grunewald, W.,
et al. (2013). SCFTIR1/AFB-auxin signalling regulates PIN vacuolar trafﬁck-
ing and auxin ﬂuxes during root gravitropism. EMBO J. 32, 260–274. doi:
10.1038/emboj.2012.310
Blancaﬂor, E. B. (2002). The cytoskeleton and gravitropism in higher plants. J. Plant
Growth Regul. 21, 120–136. doi: 10.1007/s003440010041
Blechert, S., Bockelmann, C., Füßlein, M., Schrader, T. V., Stelmach, B., Niesel,
U., et al. (1999). Structure-activity analyses reveal the existence of two separate
groups of active octadecanoids in elicitation of the tendril-coiling response of
Bryonia dioica Jacq. Planta 207, 470–479. doi: 10.1007/s004250050506
Boonsirichai, K., Sedbrook, J. C., Chen, R., Gilroy, S., and Masson, P. H. (2003).
ALTEREDRESPONSETOGRAVITYisaperipheralmembraneproteinthatmod-
ulates gravity-induced cytoplasmic alkalinization and lateral auxin transport in
plant statocytes. Plant Cell 15, 2612–2625. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15560
Briggs, W. R. (1963). Red light, auxin relationships, and the phototropic responses
of corn and oat coleoptiles. Am. J. Bot. 196–207. doi: 10.2307/2439853
Burssens, S., Himanen, K., Van De Cotte, B., Beeckman, T., Van Montagu, M., Inzé,
D., et al. (2000). Expression of cell cycle regulatory genes and morphological
alterations in response to salt stress in Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 211, 632–640.
doi: 10.1007/s004250000334
Carabelli, M., Possenti, M., Sessa, G., Ciolﬁ, A., Sassi, M., Morelli, G., et al.
(2007). Canopy shade causes a rapid and transient arrest in leaf development
through auxin-induced cytokinin oxidase activity. Genes Dev. 21, 1863–1868.
doi: 10.1101/gad.432607
Christie, J. M. (2007). Phototropin blue-light receptors. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 58,
21–45. doi: 10.1146/annurev.arplant.58.032806.103951
Christie, J. M., and Murphy, A. S. (2013). Shoot phototropism in higher plants: new
light through old concepts. Am. J. Bot. 100, 35–46. doi: 10.3732/ajb.1200340
Christie, J. M., Yang, H., Richter, G. L., Sullivan, S., Thomson, C. E., Lin,
J., et al. (2011). phot1 inhibition of ABCB19 primes lateral auxin ﬂuxes
in the shoot apex required for phototropism. PLoS Biol. 9:e1001076. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.1001076
Cluis, C. P., Mouchel, C. F., and Hardtke, C. S. (2004). The Arabidopsis transcription
factor HY5 integrates light and hormone signaling pathways. Plant J. 38, 332–347.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02052.x
Cogoli, A., and Cogoli-Greuter, M. (1997). Activation and proliferation of lympho-
cytes and other mammalian cells in microgravity. Adv. Space Biol. Med. 6, 33–79.
doi: 10.1016/S1569-2574(08)60077-5
Correll,
M. J.,
and Kiss,
J. Z. (2002).
Interactions between gravitropism
and phototropism in plants.
J. Plant Growth Regul.
21,
89–101.
doi:
10.1007/s003440010056
Cowles, J., Lemay, R., and Jahns, G. (1994). Seedling growth and development on
space shuttle. Adv. Space Res. 14, 3–12. doi: 10.1016/0273-1177(94)90273-9
Dai, Z. Q., Wang, R., Ling, S. K., Wan, Y. M., and Li, Y. H. (2007). Sim-
ulated microgravity inhibits the proliferation and osteogenesis of rat bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells. Cell Prolif. 40, 671–684. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
184.2007.00461.x
Darbelley, N., Driss-École, D., and Perbal, G. (1986). Différentiation et proliferation
dans des racines de maïs cultivé en microgravité (Biocosmos 1985). Adv. Space
Res. 6, 157–160. doi: 10.1016/0273-1177(86)90080-3
Darwin, C., and Darwin, F. (1880). The Power of Movement in Plants. London: John
Murray.
Datta, N., Chen, Y. R., and Roux, S. J. (1985). Phytochrome and calcium stimu-
lation of protein phosphorylation in isolated pea nuclei. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 128, 1403–1408. doi: 10.1016/0006-291X(85)91096-4
David, K. M., Couch, D., Braun, N., Brown, S., Grosclaude, J., and Perrot-
Rechenmann, C. (2007). The auxin-binding protein 1 is essential for the
control of cell cycle. Plant J. 50, 197–206. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.
03038.x
de Lucas, M., and Prat, S. (2014). PIFs get BRright: PHYTOCHROME INTERACT-
ING FACTORs as integrators of light and hormonal signals. New Phytol. 202,
1126–1141. doi: 10.1111/nph.12725
De Schutter, K., Joubes, J., Cools, T., Verkest, A., Corellou, F., Babiychuk, E.,
et al. (2007). Arabidopsis WEE1 kinase controls cell cycle arrest in response
to activation of the DNA integrity checkpoint. Plant Cell 19, 211–225. doi:
10.1105/tpc.106.045047
De Veylder, L., Beeckman, T., and Inze, D. (2007). The ins and outs of the plant cell
cycle. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8, 655–665. doi: 10.1038/nrm2227
DeVeylder, L., Joubes, J., and Inzé, D. (2003). Plant cell cycle transitions. Curr. Opin.
Plant Biol. 6, 536–543. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2003.09.001
Digby, J., and Firn, R. (1995). The gravitropic set-point angle (GSA): the
identiﬁcation of an important developmentally controlled variable governing
plant architecture. Plant Cell Environ. 18, 1434–1440. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
3040.1995.tb00205.x
Ding, Z., Galván-Ampudia, C. S., Demarsy, E., Łangowski, Ł., Kleine-Vehn, J.,
Fan, Y., et al. (2011). Light-mediated polarization of the PIN3 auxin transporter
for the phototropic response in Arabidopsis. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 447–452. doi:
10.1038/ncb2208
Doerner, P. (2008). “Signals and mechanisms in the control of plant growth,” in
Plant Growth Signaling, eds L. Bögre and G. Beemster (Berlin: Springer), 1–23.
doi: 10.1007/7089_2007_142
Driss-Ecole, D., Jeune, B., Prouteau, M., Julianus, P., and Perbal, G. (2000). Lentil
root statoliths reach a stable state in microgravity. Planta 211, 396–405. doi:
10.1007/s004250000298
Driss-Ecole, D., Schoevaert, D., Noin, M., and Perbal, G. (1994). Densitometric
analysis of nuclear DNA content in lentil roots grown in space. Biol. Cell 81,
59–64. doi: 10.1016/0248-4900(94)90055-8
Falkenstein, E., Groth, B., Mithöfer, A., and Weiler, E. W. (1991). Methyljasmonate
and α-linolenic acid are potent inducers of tendril coiling. Planta 185, 316–322.
doi: 10.1007/BF00201050
Ferl, R., Wheeler, R., Levine, H. G., and Paul, A.-L. (2002). Plants in space. Curr.
Opin. Plant Biol. 5, 258–263. doi: 10.1016/S1369-5266(02)00254-6
Firn, R. D., Wagstaff, C., and Digby, J. (2000). The use of mutants to probe
models of gravitropism. J. Exp. Bot. 51, 1323–1340. doi: 10.1093/jexbot/51.34
9.1323
Fitzelle, K. J., and Kiss, J. Z. (2001). Restoration of gravitropic sensitivity in starch-
deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis by hypergravity. J. Exp. Bot. 52, 265–275. doi:
10.1093/jexbot/52.355.265
Friml, J. (2003). Auxin transport – shaping the plant. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 6, 7–12.
doi: 10.1016/S1369526602000031
Friml, J., Wisniewska, J., Benkova, E., Mendgen, K., and Palme, K. (2002). Lateral
relocation of auxin efﬂux regulator PIN3 mediates tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature
415, 806–809. doi: 10.1038/415806a
Fujihira, K., Kurata, T., Watahiki, M. K., Karahara, I., and Yamamoto, K. T. (2000).
An agravitropic mutant of Arabidopsis, endodermal-amyloplast less 1, that lacks
amyloplasts in hypocotyl endodermal cell layer. Plant Cell Physiol. 41, 1193–1199.
doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcd046
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 14

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Fukaki, H., Wysocka-Diller, J., Kato, T., Fujisawa, H., Benfey, P. N., and Tasaka, M.
(1998). Geneticevidencethattheendodermisisessentialforshootgravitropismin
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J. 14, 425–430. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313X.1998.00137.x
Geldner, N., Friml, J., Stierhof, Y.-D., Juèrgens, G., and Palme, K. (2001). Auxin
transport inhibitors block PIN1 cycling and vesicle trafﬁcking. Nature 413, 425–
428. doi: 10.1038/35096571
Ginisty, H., Sicard, H., Roger, B., and Bouvet, P. (1999). Structure and functions of
nucleolin. J. Cell Sci. 112, 761–772.
González, N., Gévaudant, F., Hernould, M., Chevalier, C., and Mouras, A. (2007).
The cell cycle-associated protein kinase WEE1 regulates cell size in relation
to endoreduplication in developing tomato fruit. Plant J. 51, 642–655. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03167.x
González-Camacho, F., and Medina, F. J. (2006). The nucleolar structure and the
activity of nucleolin-like protein NopA100 during the cell cycle in proliferating
plant cells. Histochem. Cell Biol. 125, 139–153. doi: 10.1007/s00418-005-0081-1
Gutierrez, C. (2005). Coupling cell proliferation and development in plants. Nat.
Cell Biol. 7, 535–541. doi: 10.1038/ncb0605-535
Gutjahr, C., Riemann, M., Müller,A., Düchting, P.,Weiler, E. W., and Nick, P. (2005).
Cholodny-Went revisited: a role for jasmonate in gravitropism of rice coleoptiles.
Planta 222, 575–585. doi: 10.1007/s00425-005-0001-6
Haga, K., and Sakai, T. (2012). PIN auxin efﬂux carriers are necessary for pulse-
induced but not continuous light-induced phototropism in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiol. 160, 763–776. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.202432
Han, I.-S., Tseng, T.-S., Eisinger, W., and Briggs, W. R. (2008). Phytochrome A
regulates the intracellular distribution of phototropin 1–green ﬂuorescent protein
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 20, 2835–2847. doi: 10.1105/tpc.108.059915
Harrison, B., and Masson, P. H. (2008a). ARG1 and ARL2 form an actin-based
gravity-signaling chaperone complex in root statocytes. Plant Signal. Behav. 3,
650–653. doi: 10.4161/psb.3.9.5749
Harrison, B. R., and Masson, P. H. (2008b). ARL2, ARG1 and PIN3 deﬁne a
gravity signal transduction pathway in root statocytes. Plant 53, 380–392. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03351.x
Hausmann, N., Fengler, S., Hennig, A., Franz-Wachtel, M., Hampp, R., and Neef,
M. (2013). Cytosolic calcium, hydrogen peroxide and related gene expression and
protein modulation in Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures respond immediately to
altered gravitation: parabolic ﬂight data. Plant Biol. 6(Suppl. 1), 120–128. doi:
10.1111/plb.12051
Herranz, R., Anken, R., Boonstra, J., Braun, M., Christianen, P. C. M.,
Geest, M. D., et al. (2013a). Ground-based facilities for simulation of micro-
gravity: organism-speciﬁc recommendations for their use, and recommended
terminology. Astrobiology 13, 1–17. doi: 10.1089/ast.2012.0876
Herranz, R., Manzano, A. I., Van Loon, J. J. W. A., Christianen, P. C. M., and
Medina, F. J. (2013b). Proteomic signature of Arabidopsis cell cultures exposed
to magnetically induced hyper- and microgravity environments. Astrobiology 13,
217–224. doi: 10.1089/ast.2012.0883
Herranz, R., and Medina, F. J. (2014). Cell proliferation and plant develop-
ment under novel altered gravity environments. Plant Biol. 16, 23–30. doi:
10.1111/plb.12103
Hofmann, E., and Pollmann, S. (2008). Molecular mechanism of enzymatic
allene oxide cyclization in plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 46, 302–308. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2007.12.007
Hohm, T., Preuten, T., and Fankhauser, C. (2013). Phototropism: translating light
into directional growth. Am. J. Bot. 100, 47–59. doi: 10.3732/ajb.1200299
Hopkins, J. A., and Kiss, J. Z. (2012). Phototropism and gravitropism in transgenic
lines of Arabidopsis altered in the phytochrome pathway. Physiol. Plant. 145,
461–473. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2012.01607.x
Hornitschek, P., Kohnen, M. V., Lorrain, S., Rougemont, J., Ljung, K., López-
Vidriero, I., et al. (2012). Phytochrome interacting factors 4 and 5 control seedling
growth in changing light conditions by directly controlling auxin signaling. Plant
J. 71, 699–711. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.05033.x
Hoshino, T., Miyamoto, K., and Ueda, J. (2007). Gravity-controlled asymmetrical
transport of auxin regulates a gravitropic response in the early growth stage of
etiolated pea (Pisum sativum) epicotyls: studies using simulated microgravity
conditions on a three-dimensional clinostat and using an agravitropic mutant,
ageotropum. J. Plant Res. 120, 619–628. doi: 10.1007/s10265-007-0103-2
Hoson, T., Matsumoto, S., Soga, K., and Wakabayashi, K. (2010). Cortical micro-
tubules are responsible for gravity resistance in plants. Plant Signal. Behav. 5,
752–754. doi: 10.4161/psb.5.6.11706
Hoson, T., Saito, Y., Soga, K., and Wakabayashi, K. (2005). Signal perception,
transduction, and response in gravity resistance. Another graviresponse in plants.
Adv. Space Res. 36, 1196–1202. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2005.04.095
Hou, G., Mohamalawari, D. R., and Blancaﬂor, E. B. (2003). Enhanced gravitropism
of roots with a disrupted cap actin cytoskeleton. Plant Physiol. 131, 1360–1373.
doi: 10.1104/pp.014423
Huala, E., Oeller, P. W., Liscum, E., Han, I.-S., Larsen, E., and Briggs, W. R. (1997).
Arabidopsis NPH1: a protein kinase with a putative redox-sensing domain. Science
278, 2120–2123. doi: 10.1104/pp.014423
Huang, S.-J., Chang, C.-L., Wang, P.-H., Tsai, M.-C., Hsu, P.-H., and Chang,
F. (2013). A type III ACC synthase, ACS7, is involved in root gravitropism in
Arabidopsis thaliana. J. Exp. Bot. 4343–4360. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert241
Huq, E., and Quail, P. H. (2002). PIF4, a phytochrome-interacting bHLH fac-
tor, functions as a negative regulator of phytochrome B signaling in Arabidopsis.
EMBO J. 21, 2441–2450. doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2441
Inada, S., Ohgishi, M., Mayama, T., Okada, K., and Sakai, T. (2004). RPT2 is
a signal transducer involved in phototropic response and stomatal opening by
association with phototropin 1 in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16, 887–896.
doi: 10.1105/tpc.019901
Inoue, S.-I., Kinoshita, T., Matsumoto, M., Nakayama, K. I., Doi, M., and Shimazaki,
K.-I. (2008). Blue light-induced autophosphorylation of phototropin is a pri-
mary step for signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 5626–5631. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0709189105
Inoue, S.-I., Matsushita, T., Tomokiyo, Y., Matsumoto, M., Nakayama, K. I.,
Kinoshita, T., et al. (2011). Functional analyses of the activation loop of pho-
totropin2 in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 156, 117–128. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.175943
Jarillo, J. A., Gabrys, H., Capel, J., Alonso, J. M., Ecker, J. R., and Cashmore, A.
R. (2001). Phototropin-related NPL1 controls chloroplast relocation induced by
blue light. Nature 410, 952–954. doi: 10.1038/35073622
Jiao,Y., Lau, O. S., and Deng, X. W. (2007). Light-regulated transcriptional networks
in higher plants. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 217–230. doi: 10.1038/nrg2049
Johnston, E. S. (1934). Phototropic Sensitivity in Relation to Wave Length:(with Two
Plates). Washington: The Smithsonian Institution.
Jurado, S., Abraham, Z., Manzano, C., López-Torrejón, G., Pacios, L. F., and Del
Pozo, J. C. (2010). The Arabidopsis cell cycle F-Box protein SKP2A binds to auxin.
Plant Cell 22, 3891–3904. doi: 10.1105/tpc.110.078972
Jurado,S.,Diaz-Triviño,S.,Abraham,Z.,Manzano,C.,Gutierrez,C.,andDelPozo,J.
C. (2007). SKP2A protein, an F-box that regulates cell division, is degraded via the
ubiquitin pathway. Plant J. 53, 828–841. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03378.x
Kaiserli, E., Sullivan, S., Jones, M. A., Feeney, K. A., and Christie, J. M. (2009).
Domain swapping to assess the mechanistic basis of Arabidopsis phototropin 1
receptor kinase activation and endocytosis by blue light. Plant Cell 21, 3226–3244.
doi: 10.1105/tpc.109.067876
Keuskamp, D. H., Pollmann, S., Voesenek, L. A., Peeters, A. J., and Pierik, R. (2010).
Auxin transport through PIN-FORMED 3 (PIN3) controls shade avoidance and
ﬁtness during competition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 22740–22744. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1013457108
Kimbrough, J. M., Salinas-Mondragon, R., Boss,W. F., Brown, C. S., and Sederoff, H.
W. (2004). The fast and transient transcriptional network of gravity and mechan-
ical stimulation in the Arabidopsis root apex. Plant Physiol. 136, 2790–2805. doi:
10.1104/pp.104.044594
Kimura, M., and Kagawa, T. (2006). Phototropin and light-signaling in pho-
totropism. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 9, 503–508. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2006.07.003
Kinoshita, T., Doi, M., Suetsugu, N., Kagawa, T., Wada, M., and Shimazaki, K.-
I. (2001). Phot1 and phot2 mediate blue light regulation of stomatal opening.
Nature 414, 656–660. doi: 10.1038/414656a
Kircher,S.,andSchopfer,P.(2012). Photosyntheticsucroseactsascotyledon-derived
long-distance signal to control root growth during early seedling develop-
ment in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 11217–11221. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1203746109
Kiss, J. Z. (2000). Mechanisms of the early phases of plant gravitropism. Crit. Rev.
Plant Sci. 19, 551–573. doi: 10.1080/07352680091139295
Kiss, J. Z. (2014). Plant biology in reduced gravity on the Moon and Mars. Plant
Biol. 16, 12–17. doi: 10.1111/plb.12031
Kiss, J. Z., Aanes, G., Schieﬂoe, M., Coelho, L. H., Millar, K. D., and Edelmann, R.
E. (2014). Changes in operational procedures to improve spaceﬂight experiments
inplant biology in the European Modular Cultivation System. Adv. Space Res. 53,
818–827. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2013.12.024
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 15

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Kiss, J. Z., Edelmann, R. E., and Wood, P. C. (1999). Gravitropism of hypocotyls of
wild-type and starch-deﬁcient Arabidopsis seedlings in spaceﬂight studies. Planta
209, 96–103. doi: 10.1007/s004250050610
Kiss, J. Z., Guisinger, M. M., and Miller, A. J. (1998a). What is the threshold amount
of starch necessary for full gravitropic sensitivity? Adv. Space Res. 21, 1197–1202.
doi: 10.1016/S0273-1177(97)00635-2
Kiss, J. Z., Katembe, W. J., and Edelmann, R. E. (1998b). Gravitropism and develop-
ment of wild-type and starch-deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis during spaceﬂight.
Physiol. Plant. 102, 493–502. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-3054.1998.1020403.x
Kiss, J. Z., Guisinger, M. M., Miller, A. J., and Stackhouse, K. S. (1997). Reduced
gravitropism in hypocotyls of starch-deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell
Physiol. 38, 518–525. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029199
Kiss, J. Z., Hertel, R., and Sack, F. D. (1989). Amyloplasts are necessary for full
gravitropic sensitivity in roots of Arabidopsis thaliana. Planta 177, 198–206. doi:
10.1007/BF00392808
Kiss, J. Z., Millar, K. D., and Edelmann, R. E. (2012). Phototropism of Arabidopsis
thaliana in microgravity and fractional gravity on the International Space Station.
Planta 236, 635–645. doi: 10.1007/s00425-012-1633-y
Kiss, J. Z., Mullen, J. L., Correll, M. J., and Hangarter, R. P. (2003). Phytochromes
A and B mediate red-light-induced positive phototropism in roots. Plant Physiol.
131, 1411–1417. doi: 10.1104/pp.013847
Kiss, J. Z., and Sack, F. D. (1989). Reduced gravitropic sensitivity in roots of
a starch-deﬁcient mutant of Nicotiana sylvestris. Planta 180, 123–130. doi:
10.1007/BF02411418
Kiss, J. Z., and Sack, F. D. (1990). Severely reduced gravitropism in dark-grown
hypocotyls of a starch-deﬁcient mutant of Nicotiana sylvestris. Plant Physiol. 94,
1867–1873. doi: 10.1104/pp.94.4.1867
Kiss, J. Z.,Wright, J. B., and Caspar, T. (1996). Gravitropism in roots of intermediate-
starch mutants of Arabidopsis. Physiol. Plant. 97, 237–244. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-
3054.1996.970205.x
Kleine-Vehn, J., Ding, Z., Jones, A. R., Tasaka, M., Morita, M. T., and Friml, J.
(2010). Gravity-induced PIN transcytosis for polarization of auxin ﬂuxes in
gravity-sensing root cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 22344–22349. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1013145107
Knight, T. A. (1806). On the direction of the radicle and germen during the vegeta-
tion of seeds. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 96, 99–108. doi: 10.1098/rstl.1806.0006
Kojima, H., Suzuki, T., Kato, T., Enomoto, K.-I., Sato, S., Kato, T., et al. (2007).
Sugar-inducible expression of the nucleolin-1 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana and
its role in ribosome synthesis, growth and development. Plant J. 49, 1053–1063.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.03016.x
Komaki, S., and Sugimoto, K. (2012). Control of the plant cell cycle by devel-
opmental and environmental cues. Plant Cell Physiol. 53, 953–964. doi:
10.1093/pcp/pcs070
Kong, S. G., Suzuki, T., Tamura, K., Mochizuki, N., Hara-Nishimura, I., and
Nagatani, A. (2006). Blue light-induced association of phototropin 2 with the
Golgi apparatus. Plant J. 45, 994–1005. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02667.x
Kordyum, E. L. (1997). Biology of plant cells in microgravity and under clinostating.
Int. Rev. Cytol. 171, 1–78. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7696(08)62585-1
Kumar,N.S.,Stevens,M.H.H.,andKiss,J.Z.(2008). Plastidmovementinstatocytes
of the arg1 (altered response to gravity) mutant. Am. J. Bot. 95, 177–184. doi:
10.3732/ajb.95.2.177
Kumar, P., Millar, K. D., and Kiss, J. Z. (2011). Inﬂorescence stems of the mdr1
mutant display altered gravitropism and phototropism. Environ. Exp. Bot. 70,
244–250. doi: 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2010.09.019
Lau, O. S., and Deng, X. W. (2010). Plant hormone signaling lightens up: inte-
grators of light and hormones. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 13, 571–577. doi:
10.1016/j.pbi.2010.07.001
Lee, J., He, K., Stolc, V., Lee, H., Figueroa, P., Gao, Y., et al. (2007). Analysis of tran-
scription factor HY5 genomic binding sites revealed its hierarchical role in light
regulation of development. Plant Cell 19, 731–749. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.047688
León, J., and Sánchez-Serrano, J. J. (1999). Molecular biology of jasmonic acid
biosynthesis in plants. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 37, 373–380. doi: 10.1016/S0981-
9428(99)80043-6
Legué, V., Yu, F., Driss-École, D., and Perbal, G. (1996). Effects of gravitropic stress
on the development of the primary root of lentil seedlings grown in space. J.
Biotechnol. 47, 129–135. doi: 10.1016/0168-1656(96)01356-9
Leitz, G., Kang, B.-H., Schoenwaelder, M. E., and Staehelin, L. A. (2009). Sta-
tolith sedimentation kinetics and force transduction to the cortical endoplasmic
reticulum in gravity-sensing Arabidopsis columella cells. Plant Cell 21, 843–860.
doi: 10.1105/tpc.108.065052
Leivar, P., Monte, E., Oka, Y., Liu, T., Carle, C., Castillon, A., et al. (2008).
Multiple phytochrome-interacting bHLH transcription factors repress prema-
ture seedling photomorphogenesis in darkness. Curr. Biol. 18, 1815–1823. doi:
10.1016/j.cub.2008.10.058
Leivar, P., and Quail, P. H. (2011). PIFs: pivotal components in a cellular signaling
hub. Trends Plant Sci. 16, 19–28. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2010.08.003
Link, B. M., Durst, S. J., Zhou, W., and Stankovic, B. (2003). Seed-to-seed growth
of Arabidopsis thaliana on the International Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 31,
2237–2243. doi: 10.1016/S0273-1177(03)00250-3
Löfke, C., Zwiewka, M., Heilmann, I., Van Montagu, M. C., Teichmann, T., and
Friml, J. (2013). Asymmetric gibberellin signaling regulates vacuolar trafﬁcking
of PIN auxin transporters during root gravitropism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
110, 3627–3632. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1300107110
López-Juez, E., Dillon, E., Magyar, Z., Khan, S., Hazeldine, S., De Jager, S. M.,
et al. (2008). Distinct light-Initiated gene expression and cell cycle programs
in the shoot apex and cotyledons of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 20, 947–968. doi:
10.1105/tpc.107.057075
Luschnig, C., Gaxiola, R. A., Grisaﬁ, P., and Fink, G. R. (1998). EIR1, a root-speciﬁc
protein involved in auxin transport, is required for gravitropism in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Genes Dev. 12, 2175–2187. doi: 10.1101/gad.12.14.2175
Ma, L., Li, J., Qu, L., Hager, J., Chen, Z., Zhao, H., et al. (2001). Light
control of Arabidopsis development entails coordinated regulation of genome
expression and cellular pathways. Plant Cell 13, 2589–2607. doi: 10.1105/tpc.0
10229
MacCleery, S. A., and Kiss, J. Z. (1999). Plastid sedimentation kinetics in roots of
wild-type and starch-deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 120, 183–
192. doi: 10.1104/pp.120.1.183
Magyar, Z., De Veylder, L., Atanassova, L., Bako, L., Inzé, D., and Bögre, L. (2005).
The role of Arabidopsis E2FB transcription factor in regulating auxin-dependent
cell division. Plant Cell 17, 2527–2541. doi: 10.1105/tpc.105.033761
Mancuso, S., Barlow, P. W., Volkmann, D., and Baluska, F. (2006). Actin turnover-
mediated gravity response in maize root apices. Plant Signal. Behav. 1, 52–58. doi:
10.4161/psb.1.2.2432
Manzano, A., Van Loon, J., Christianen, P., Gonzalez-Rubio, J., Medina, F. J., and
Herranz, R. (2012). Gravitational and magnetic ﬁeld variations synergize to cause
subtle variations in the global transcriptional state of Arabidopsis in vitro callus
cultures. BMC Genomics 13:105. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-105
Manzano, A. I., Larkin, O., Dijkstra, C., Anthony, P., Davey, M., Eaves, L., et al.
(2013). Meristematic cell proliferation and ribosome biogenesis are decoupled
in diamagnetically levitated Arabidopsis seedlings. BMC Plant Biol. 13:124. doi:
10.1186/1471-2229-13-124
Martzivanou, M., Babbick, M., Cogoli-Greuter, M., and Hampp, R. (2006).
Microgravity-related changes in gene expression after short-term exposure of
Arabidopsisthaliana cellcultures. Protoplasma 229,155–162. doi: 10.1007/s00709-
006-0203-1
Masubelele, N. H., Dewitte, W., Menges, M., Maughan, S., Collins, C., Huntley, R.,
et al. (2005). D-type cyclins activate division in the root apex to promote seed
germination in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 15694–15699. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0507581102
Matía, I., González-Camacho, F., Herranz, R., Kiss, J. Z., Gasset, G., Van Loon,
J. J. W. A., et al. (2010). Plant cell proliferation and growth are altered by
microgravity conditions in spaceﬂight. J. Plant Physiol. 167, 184–193 doi:
10.1016/j.jplph.2009.08.012
Matía, I., González-Camacho, F., Marco, R., Kiss, J. Z., Gasset, G., and Medina, F.
J. (2005). Nucleolar structure and proliferation activity of Arabidopsis root cells
from seedlings germinated on the International Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 36,
1244–1253. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2005.01.068
Matía, I., Van Loon, J. J. W. A., Carnero-Díaz, E., Marco, R., and Medina, F. J.
(2009). Seed germination and seedling growth under simulated microgravity
causesalterationsinplantcellproliferationandribosomebiogenesis. Microgravity
Sci. Technol. 21, 169–174. doi: 10.1007/s12217-008-9069-5
Medina, F. J., Cerdido, A., and De Cárcer, G. (2000). The functional organization of
the nucleolus in proliferating plant cells. Eur. J. Histochem. 44, 117–131.
Medina, F. J., and Herranz, R. (2010). Microgravity environment uncouples cell
growth and cell proliferation in root meristematic cells: the mediator role of
auxin. Plant Signal. Behav. 5, 176–179. doi: 10.4161/psb.5.2.10966
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 16

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Millar, K. D., Kumar, P., Correll, M. J., Mullen, J. L., Hangarter, R. P., Edelmann, R. E.,
et al. (2010). A novel phototropic response to red light is revealed in microgravity.
New Phytol. 186, 648–656. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03211.x
Miyamoto, K., Yamamoto, R., Fujii, S., Soga, K., Hoson, T., Shimazu, T., et al.
(1999). Growth and development in Arabidopsis thaliana through an entire life
cycle under simulated microgravity conditions on a clinostat. J. Plant Res. 112,
413–418. doi: 10.1007/PL00013865
Mizukami,Y. (2001). A matter of size: developmental control of organ size in plants.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 4, 533–539. doi: 10.1016/S1369-5266(00)00212-0
Molas, M. L., and Kiss, J. Z. (2009). Phototropism and gravitropism in plants. Adv.
Bot. Res. 49, 1–34. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2296(08)00601-0
Møller, S. G., Ingles, P. J., and Whitelam, G. C. (2002). The cell biology
of phytochrome signalling. New Phytol. 154, 553–590. doi: 10.1046/j.1469-
8137.2002.00419.x
Morita, M. T., Saito, C., Nakano, A., and Tasaka, M. (2007). endodermal-amyloplast
less is a novel allele of SHORT-ROOT. Adv. Space Res. 39, 1127–1133. doi:
10.1016/j.asr.2006.12.020
Morita, M. T., and Tasaka, M. (2004). Gravity sensing and signaling. Curr. Opin.
Plant Biol. 7, 712–718. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2004.09.001
Motchoulski, A., and Liscum, E. (1999). Arabidopsis NPH3: a NPH1 photoreceptor-
interacting protein essential for phototropism. Science 286, 961–964. doi:
10.1126/science.286.5441.961
Muday, G. K., and Murphy, A. S. (2002). An emerging model of auxin transport
regulation. Plant Cell 14, 293–299. doi: 10.1105/tpc.140230
Mullen, J. L., Wolverton, C., Ishikawa, H., and Evans, M. L. (2000). Kinetics of
constant gravitropic stimulus responses in Arabidopsis roots using a feedback
system. Plant Physiol. 123, 665–670. doi: 10.1104/pp.123.2.665
Nemhauser, J. L. (2008).
Dawning of a new era: photomorphogenesis as
an integrated molecular network. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 11, 4–8. doi:
10.1016/j.pbi.2007.10.005
Nemhauser, J. L., and Chory, J. (2004). BRing it on: new insights into the mechanism
of brassinosteroid action. J. Exp. Bot. 55, 265–270. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erh024
Nick, P., and Schäfer, E. (1988). Interaction of gravi-and phototropic stimulation
in the response of maize (Zea mays L.) coleoptiles. Planta 173, 213–220. doi:
10.1007/BF00403013
Nishihama, R., and Kohchi, T. (2013). Evolutionary insights into photoregulation
of the cell cycle in the green lineage. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 16, 630–637. doi:
10.1016/j.pbi.2013.07.006
Noh, B., Bandyopadhyay, A., Peer, W. A., Spalding, E. P., and Murphy, A. S. (2003).
Enhanced gravi-and phototropism in plant mdr mutants mislocalizing the auxin
efﬂux protein PIN1. Nature 423, 999–1002. doi: 10.1038/nature01716
Okada, K., and Shimura, Y. (1992). Mutational analysis of root gravitropism and
phototropism of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Funct. Plant Biol. 19, 439–448.
doi: 10.1071/PP9920439
Ottenschläger, I., Wolff, P., Wolverton, C., Bhalerao, R. P., Sandberg, G., Ishikawa,
H., et al. (2003). Gravity-regulated differential auxin transport from columella
to lateral root cap cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 2987–2991. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0437936100
Ovid. (2008). Metamorphosis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paul, A.-L., Daugherty, C. J., Bihn, E. A., Chapman, D. K., Norwood, K. L., and Ferl,
R. J. (2001). Transgene expression patterns indicate that spaceﬂight affects stress
signal perception and transduction in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 126, 613–621.
doi: 10.1104/pp.126.2.613
Paul, A.-L., Zupanska, A. K., Ostrow, D. T., Zhang, Y., Sun, Y., Li, J.-L., et al.
(2012). Spaceﬂight transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel environment.
Astrobiology 12, 40–56. doi: 10.1089/ast.2011.0696
Perbal, G. (1999). Gravisensing in roots. Adv. Space Res. 24, 723–729. doi:
10.1016/S0273-1177(99)00405-6
Perbal, G., and Driss-Ecole, D. (2003). Mechanotransduction in gravisensing cells.
Trends Plant Sci. 8, 498–504. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2003.09.005
Perbal, G., Driss-Ecole, D., Tewinkel, M., and Volkmann, D. (1997). Statocyte
polarity and gravisensitivity in seedling roots grown in microgravity. Planta 203,
S57–S62. doi: 10.1007/PL00008115
Perrot-Rechenmann, C. (2010). Cellular responses to auxin: division versus
expansion. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, a001446. doi: 10.1101/cshper-
spect.a001446
Petrášek, J., and Friml, J. (2009). Auxin transport routes in plant development.
Development 136, 2675–2688. doi: 10.1242/dev.030353
Pickard, B. G., and Thimann, K. V. (1964). Transport and distribution of auxin
during tropistic response. II. The lateral migration of auxin in phototropism of
coleoptiles. Plant Physiol. 39, 341–350. doi: 10.1104/pp.39.3.341
Pontvianne, F., Matía, I., Douet, J., Tourmente, S., Medina, F. J., Echeverría, M.,
et al. (2007). Characterization of AtNUC-L1 reveals a central role of nucleolin in
nucleolus organization and silencing of AtNUC-L2 gene in Arabidopsis. Mol. Biol.
Cell 18, 369–379. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E06-08-0751
Reichler, S. A., Balk, J., Brown, M. E., Woodruff, K., Clark, G. B., and Roux,
S. J. (2001). Light differentially regulates cell division and the mRNA abun-
dance of pea nucleolin during de-etiolation. Plant Physiol. 125, 339–350. doi:
10.1104/pp.125.1.339
Riemann, M., Bouyer, D., Hisada,A., Müller,A.,Yatou, O.,Weiler, E.W., et al. (2009).
Phytochrome A requires jasmonate for photodestruction. Planta 229, 1035–1045.
doi: 10.1007/s00425-009-0891-9
Riemann, M., Gutjahr, C., Korte, A., Danger, B., Muramatsu, T., Bayer, U., et al.
(2007). GER1, a GDSL motif-encoding gene from rice is a novel early light-and
asmonate-induced gene. Plant Biol. 9, 32–40. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-924561
Riemann, M., Müller, A., Korte, A., Furuya, M., Weiler, E. W., and Nick, P. (2003).
Impaired induction of the jasmonate pathway in the rice mutant hebiba. Plant
Physiol. 133, 1820–1830. doi: 10.1104/pp.103.027490
Roberts, D., Pedmale, U. V., Morrow, J., Sachdev, S., Lechner, E., Tang, X., et al.
(2011). Modulation of phototropic responsiveness in Arabidopsis through ubiq-
uitination of phototropin 1 by the CUL3-ring E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL3NPH3.
Plant Cell 23, 3627–3640. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.087999
Roychoudhry, S., Del Bianco, M., Kieffer, M., and Kepinski, S. (2013). Auxin controls
gravitropic setpoint angle in higher plant lateral branches. Curr. Biol. 23, 1497–
1504. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.06.034
Ruppel, N. J., Hangarter, R. P., and Kiss, J. Z. (2001). Red-light-induced positive pho-
totropism in Arabidopsis roots. Planta 212, 424–430. doi: 10.1007/s004250000410
Sack, F. D. (1991). Plant gravity sensing. Int. Rev. Cytol. 127, 193–252. doi:
10.1016/S0074-7696(08)60695-6
Sack, F. D. (1997). Plastids and gravitropic sensing. Planta 203, S63–S68. doi:
10.1007/PL00008116
Sacks, M. M., Silk, W. K., and Burman, P. (1997). Effect of water stress on cortical
cell division rates within the apical meristem of primary roots of maize. Plant
Physiol. 114, 519–527. doi: 10.1104/pp.114.2.519
Sáez-Vásquez, J., and Medina, F. J. (2008). “The plant nucleolus,” in Advances in
Botanical Research, Vol. 47, eds J. C. Kader and M. Delseny (San Diego, CA:
Elsevier), 1–46.
Saito, C., Morita, M. T., Kato, T., and Tasaka, M. (2005). Amyloplasts and vac-
uolar membrane dynamics in the living graviperceptive cell of the Arabidopsis
inﬂorescence stem. Plant Cell 17, 548–558. doi: 10.1105/tpc.104.026138
Sakai, T., Kagawa, T., Kasahara, M., Swartz, T. E., Christie, J. M., Briggs, W. R.,
et al. (2001). Arabidopsis nph1 and npl1: blue light receptors that mediate both
phototropism and chloroplast relocation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 6969–
6974. doi: 10.1073/pnas.101137598
Sakai, T., Wada, T., Ishiguro, S., and Okada, K. (2000). RPT2: a signal trans-
ducer of the phototropic response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 12, 225–236. doi:
10.1105/tpc.12.2.225
Sakamoto, K., and Briggs, W. R. (2002). Cellular and subcellular localization of
phototropin 1. Plant Cell 14, 1723–1735. doi: 10.1105/tpc.003293
Sato, F., Takeda, S., Matsushima, H., and Yamada, Y. (1999). Cell growth and organ
differentiation in cultured tobacco cells under spaceﬂight condition. Biol. Sci.
Space 13, 18–24. doi: 10.2187/bss.13.18
Shaw, P., and Doonan, J. H. (2005). The Nucleolus. Playing by different rules? Cell
Cycle 4, 102–105. doi: 10.4161/cc.4.1.1467
Sedbrook, J. C., Chen, R., and Masson, P. H. (1999). ARG1 (altered response to grav-
ity) encodes a DnaJ-like protein that potentially interacts with the cytoskeleton.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 1140–1145. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.3.1140
Shen-Miller, J., and Hinchman, R. R. (1995). Nucleolar transformation in plants
grown on clinostats. Protoplasma 185, 194–204. doi: 10.1007/BF01272860
Simmons, C., Migliaccio, F., Masson, P., Caspar, T., and Söll, D. (1995). A novel root
gravitropism mutant of Arabidopsis thaliana exhibiting altered auxin physiology.
Physiol. Plant. 93, 790–798. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.1995.tb05133.x
Smith, J. D., Todd, P., and Staehelin, L. A. (1997). Modulation of statolith mass
and grouping in white clover (Trifolium repens) grown in 1-g, microgravity and
on the clinostat. Plant J. 12, 1361–1373. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.1997.1206
1361.x
www.frontiersin.org
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 17

Vandenbrink et al.
Light and gravity in development
Sobol,M.,González-Camacho,F.,Rodríguez-Vilariño,V.,Kordyum,E.,andMedina,
F. J. (2006). Subnucleolar location of ﬁbrillarin and NopA64 in Lepidium sativum
root meristematic cells is changed in altered gravity. Protoplasma 228, 209–219.
doi: 10.1007/s00709-006-0157-3
Sobol, M., González-Camacho, F., Rodríguez-Vilariño, V., Kordyum, E. L., and
Medina, F. J. (2005). Clinorotation inﬂuences rDNA and NopA100 localization
in nucleoli. Adv. Space Res. 36, 1254–1262. doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2005.05.072
Staves, M. P. (1997). Cytoplasmic streaming and gravity sensing in Chara internodal
cells. Planta 203, S79–S84. doi: 10.1007/PL00008119
Staves, M. P.,Wayne, R., and Leopold,A. C. (1997a). Cytochalasin D does not inhibit
gravitropism in roots. Am. J. Bot. 84, 1530–1535. doi: 10.2307/2446614
Staves, M. P., Wayne, R., and Leopold, A. C. (1997b). The effect of the external
medium on the gravitropic curvature of rice (Oryza sativa, Poaceae) roots. Am.
J. Bot. 84, 1522–1529. doi: 10.2307/2446613
Stelmach, B. A., Müller, A., Hennig, P., Laudert, D., Andert, L., and Weiler, E.
W. (1998). Quantitation of the octadecanoid 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid, a sig-
nalling compound in plant mechanotransduction. Phytochemistry 47, 539–546.
doi: 10.1016/S0031-9422(97)00547-5
Strohm, A. K., Barrett-Wilt, G. A., and Masson, P. H. (2014). A functional TOC
complex contributes to gravity signal transduction in Arabidopsis. Front. Plant
Sci. 5:148. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00148
Suetsugu, N., and Wada, M. (2007).
Phytochrome-dependent photomove-
ment responses mediated by phototropin family proteins in cryptogam plants.
Photochem. Photobiol. 83, 87–93. doi: 10.1562/2006-02-27-IR-817
Swarup, R., Friml, J., Marchant, A., Ljung, K., Sandberg, G., Palme, K., et al. (2001).
Localization of the auxin permease AUX1 suggests two functionally distinct hor-
mone transport pathways operate in the Arabidopsis root apex. Genes Dev. 15,
2648–2653. doi: 10.1101/gad.210501
Swarup, R., Kramer, E. M., Perry, P., Knox, K., Ottoline Leyser, H. M., Haseloff, J.,
et al. (2005). Root gravitropism requires lateral root cap and epidermal cells for
transport and response to mobile auxin signal. Nat. Cell Biol. 7, 1057–1065. doi:
10.1038/ncb1316
Tasaka,M.,Kato,T.,andFukaki,H.(1999). Theendodermisandshootgravitropism.
Trends Plant Sci. 4, 103–107. doi: 10.1016/S1360-1385(99)01376-X
Tepperman, J. M., Hudson, M. E., Khanna, R., Zhu, T., Chang, S. H., Wang,
X., et al. (2004). Expression proﬁling of phyB mutant demonstrates substan-
tial contribution of other phytochromes to red-light-regulated gene expression
during seedling de-etiolation. Plant J. 38, 725–739. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
313X.2004.02084.x
Theophrastus. (1976). De Causis Plantarum. London: Harvard University Press.
Tong, C. G., Reichler, S. A., Blumenthal, S., Balk, J., Hsieh, H. L., and Roux, S. J.
(1997). Light regulation of the abundance of mRNA encoding a nucleolin- like
protein localized in the nucleoli of pea nuclei. Plant Physiol. 114, 643–652. doi:
10.1104/pp.114.2.643
Vandenbrink, J. P., Brown, E. A., Harmer, S. L., and Blackman, B. K. (2014). Turning
heads: the biology of solar tracking in sunﬂower. Plant Sci. 224, 20–26. doi:
10.1016/j.plantsci.2014.04.006
Van Loon, J. J. W. A. (2007). Micro-gravity and mechanomics. Gravit. Space Biol.
20, 3–17.
Vitha, S., Zhao, L., and Sack, F. D. (2000). Interaction of root gravitropism and
phototropism in Arabidopsis wild-type and starchless mutants. Plant Physiol. 122,
453–462. doi: 10.1104/pp.122.2.453
Wada, M., Kagawa, T., and Sato, Y. (2003). Chloroplast movement. Annu. Rev. Plant
Biol. 54, 455–468. doi: 10.1146/annurev.arplant.54.031902.135023
Wan, Y.-L., Eisinger, W., Ehrhardt, D., Kubitscheck, U., Baluska, F., and Briggs,
W. (2008). The subcellular localization and blue-light-induced movement of
phototropin 1-GFP in etiolated seedlings of Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Plant 1,
103–117. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssm011
Wang, Y., Fan, X., Lin, F., He, G., Terzaghi, W., Zhu, D., et al. (2014). Arabidopsis
noncoding RNA mediates control of photomorphogenesis by red light. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 10359–10364. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1409457111
Wasternack, C., and Hause, B. (2013). Jasmonates: biosynthesis, perception, signal
transduction and action in plant stress response, growth and development. An
update to the 2007 review in Annals of Botany. Ann. Bot. 111, 1021–1058. doi:
10.1093/aob/mcm079
Wayne, R., Staves, M., and Leopold, A. (1990). Gravity-dependent polar-
ity of cytoplasmic streaming in Nitellopsis. Protoplasma 155, 43–57. doi:
10.1007/BF01322614
Wayne, R., and Staves, M. P. (1996). A down to earth model of gravisensing or
Newton’s law of gravitation from the apple’s perspective. Physiol. Plant. 98, 917–
921. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.1996.tb06703.x
Wayne, R., Staves, M. P., and Leopold, A. C. (1992). The contribution of
the extracellular matrix to gravisensing in characean cells. J. Cell Sci. 101,
611–623.
Weiler, E. W., Albrecht, T., Groth, B., Xia, Z.-Q., Luxem, M., Liß, H., et al. (1993).
Evidence for the involvement of jasmonates and their octadecanoid precursors in
the tendril coiling response of Bryonia dioica. Phytochemistry 32, 591–600. doi:
10.1016/S0031-9422(00)95142-2
Weise, S. E., and Kiss, J. Z. (1999). Gravitropism of inﬂorescence stems in
starch-deﬁcient mutants of Arabidopsis. Int. J. Plant Sci. 160, 521–527. doi:
10.1086/314142
Weisshaar, B., Armstrong, G. A., Block, A., Silva, O. D. C., and Hahlbrock, K. (1991).
Light-inducible and constitutively expressed DNA-binding proteins recognizing a
plant promoter element with functional relevance in light responsiveness. EMBO
J. 10, 1777–1786.
Wellmer, F., Kircher, S., Rügner, A., Frohnmeyer, H., Schäfer, E., and Harter,
K. (1999). Phosphorylation of the parsley bZIP transcription factor CPRF2 is
regulated by light. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 29476–29482. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.41.
29476
Went, F. W., and Thimann, K. V. (1937). Phytohormones. New York: Macmillan.
West, G., Inzé, D., and Beemster, G. T. S. (2004). Cell cycle modulation in the
response of the primary root of Arabidopsis to salt stress. Plant Physiol. 135,
1050–1058. doi: 10.1104/pp.104.040022
Whitford, R., Fernandez,A., Tejos, R., Pérez,A. C., Kleine-Vehn, J.,Vanneste, S., et al.
(2012). GOLVEN secretory peptides regulate auxin carrier turnover during plant
gravitropic responses. Dev. Cell 22, 678–685. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.02.002
Wolverton, C., and Kiss, J. Z. (2009). An update on plant space biology. Gravit. Space
Biol. 22, 13–20.
Wolverton, C., Mullen, J. L., Ishikawa, H., and Evans, M. L. (2002). Root gravit-
ropism in response to a signal originating outside of the cap. Planta 215, 153–157.
doi: 10.1007/s00425-001-0726-9
Xiong, Y., Mccormack, M., Li, L., Hall, Q., Xiang, C., and Sheen, J. (2013). Glucose-
TOR signalling reprograms the transcriptome and activates meristems. Nature
496, 181–186. doi: 10.1038/nature12030
Yamamoto, K., and Kiss, J. Z. (2002). Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton results
in the promotion of gravitropism in inﬂorescence stems and hypocotyls of
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 128, 669–681. doi: 10.1104/pp.010804
Yoder, T. L., Zheng, H.-Q., Todd, P., and Staehelin, L. A. (2001). Amyloplast
sedimentation dynamics in maize columella cells support a new model for
the gravity-sensing apparatus of roots. Plant Physiol. 125, 1045–1060. doi:
10.1104/pp.125.2.1045
Yu, F., Driss-École, D., Rembur, J., Legué, V., and Perbal, G. (1999). Effect of
microgravity on the cell cycle in the lentil root. Physiol. Plant. 105, 171–178. doi:
10.1034/j.1399-3054.1999.105125.x
Žádníková, P., Petrášek, J., Marhavý, P., Raz, V., Vandenbussche, F., Ding,
Z., et al. (2010). Role of PIN-mediated auxin efﬂux in apical hook develop-
ment of Arabidopsis thaliana. Development 137, 607–617. doi: 10.1242/dev.
041277
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed
as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Received: 11 July 2014; accepted: 30 September 2014; published online: 28 October
2014.
Citation: Vandenbrink JP, Kiss JZ, Herranz R and Medina FJ (2014) Light and grav-
ity signals synergize in modulating plant development. Front. Plant Sci. 5:563. doi:
10.3389/fpls.2014.00563
This article was submitted to Plant Physiology, a section of the journal Frontiers in
Plant Science.
Copyright © 2014 Vandenbrink, Kiss, Herranz and Medina. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, pro-
vided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in
this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Plant Science | Plant Physiology
October 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 563 | 18
