life
Hypothesis
Mechanotransduction in Prokaryotes: A Possible Mechanism of
Spaceﬂight Adaptation
Patricia Fajardo-Cavazos and Wayne L. Nicholson *


Citation: Fajardo-Cavazos, P.;
Nicholson, W.L.
Mechanotransduction in Prokaryotes:
A Possible Mechanism of Spaceﬂight
Adaptation. Life 2021, 11, 33.
https://doi.org/10.3390/life11010033
Received: 17 November 2020
Accepted: 4 January 2021
Published: 7 January 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neu-
tral with regard to jurisdictional clai-
ms in published maps and institutio-
nal afﬁliations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors. Li-
censee MDPI, Basel,
Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and con-
ditions of the Creative Commons At-
tribution (CC BY)
license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Space Life Sciences Laboratory, Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, University of Florida,
505 Odyssey Way, Merritt Island, FL 32953, USA; pfajardo@uﬂ.edu
* Correspondence: WLN@uﬂ.edu; Tel.: +1-321-261-3773
Abstract: Our understanding of the mechanisms of microgravity perception and response in prokary-
otes (Bacteria and Archaea) lag behind those which have been elucidated in eukaryotic organisms.
In this hypothesis paper, we: (i) review how eukaryotic cells sense and respond to microgravity
using various pathways responsive to unloading of mechanical stress; (ii) we observe that prokary-
otic cells possess many structures analogous to mechanosensitive structures in eukaryotes; (iii) we
review current evidence indicating that prokaryotes also possess active mechanosensing and mechan-
otransduction mechanisms; and (iv) we propose a complete mechanotransduction model including
mechanisms by which mechanical signals may be transduced to the gene expression apparatus
through alterations in bacterial nucleoid architecture, DNA supercoiling, and epigenetic pathways.
Keywords: bacteria; gravity; mechanosensing; mechanotransduction
1. Introduction
On 17 December 1946, the ﬁrst documented experiment to study the response of a
living organism to spaceﬂight was performed, with the launch and recovery of fungal
spores on a V-2 rocket from White Sands, New Mexico [1]. Since that time, considerable the-
oretical and experimental effort has been devoted to understanding how living organisms
sense, respond, and adapt to long-term spaceﬂight, particularly regarding their exposure
to chronic microgravity. Extensive investigations conducted in space have resulted in a
relative wealth of understanding of microgravity effects at the mechanistic level in eukary-
otic organisms including humans [2], animals [3], plants [4], and protists [5]. In contrast
to the situation in eukaryotes, it has proven more difﬁcult to elucidate at the mechanistic
level how single-celled prokaryotes (Bacteria and Archaea) sense and respond to reduced
gravity [6–8].
In this hypothesis paper, we brieﬂy review the state of our understanding of how
eukaryotic cells sense, respond, and adapt to spaceﬂight microgravity, via various path-
ways responsive to the unloading of mechanical stress. We observe that prokaryotic cells
possess many structures analogous to mechanosensitive structures in eukaryotes. We
review and update the evidence indicating that prokaryotes possess and actively utilize
mechanosensing and mechanotransduction mechanisms, and we expand upon existing
models to include the role of the bacterial nucleoid in converting external mechanical
information into the modulation of gene expression. This hypothesis builds upon, updates,
and expands previous work in the ﬁeld, to which the reader is referred for background
information [9,10].
2. Mechanosensing in Eukaryotes
Terrestrial life on Earth has evolved in the continuous presence of gravity [10], and
eukaryotic organisms have developed systems to sense their orientation in the gravity
ﬁeld and to respond appropriately. A large body of evidence has accumulated supporting
the idea that mechanics play a key role in regulating various eukaryotic cell functions
Life 2021, 11, 33. https://doi.org/10.3390/life11010033
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/life

Life 2021, 11, 33
2 of 11
such as cell division, differentiation, immunity, development, and motility. Many of these
diverse cellular functions are mediated through pathways of mechanosensing and mechan-
otransduction, the molecular details of which are currently being elucidated [11–14]. A
generalized and simpliﬁed schematic diagram of the steps involved in eukaryotic mechan-
otransduction is presented in Figure 1 and described below.
Figure 1. Schematic model of eukaryotic mechanotransduction pathway. An external mechanical
force generated through the extracellular matrix (ECM) or tight junctions is sensed by mechanosensi-
tive proteins in the cytoplasmic membrane (CM) and transduced through the cytoskeleton, LINC
protein complexes in the nuclear membrane (NM), and nucleoskeleton to effect transcription of
mechanosensitive genes. Colored shapes represent proteins in the transduction pathway; their
speciﬁc identities and functions are elaborated in refs. [15–17]. See text for details.
In the simpliﬁed model depicted in Figure 1, external force can consist of any number
of mechanical phenomena, such as shear, stretch, compression, or sedimentation of otoliths
or statoliths. Physical forces can also be exerted on a cell through interaction with the
extracellular matrix, or with other cells connected via tight junctions. In addition, while
not strictly an “external” force, because the nucleus itself is suspended in the cytoskeletal
matrix, and its density differs from the surrounding cytoplasm, the nucleus itself exerts
mechanical stress on the cell.
The simpliﬁed model above depicts an idealized mechanoreceptor as a protein com-
plex embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane that senses external physical forces (Figure 1).
The actual situation is almost certainly more complex, and likely differs considerably de-
pending on the type of receptor, cell, tissue, or organism studied. On the simpler end of
the spectrum are single transmembrane mechanosensitive ion channels that respond to
membrane deformation [18]. On a more complex level, the surfaces of many eukaryotic
cells exhibit focal adhesion (FA) structures which physically link the extracellular ma-
trix to the internal cytoskeleton through complexes of signaling proteins, among them
mechanosensitive transmembrane proteins. Such structures establish both physical and
functional connections between the cell and its external environment (reviewed in [19,20]).
As DNA is separated from the cytoplasmic compartment and contained within a
membrane-bound nucleus (Figure 1), how do mechanical signals reach the DNA to modu-

Life 2021, 11, 33
3 of 11
late gene expression? In addition to the cytoplasmic cytoskeleton, the nucleus itself contains
a skeleton (the nucleoskeleton) composed of actin and lamin ﬁlaments. Furthermore, the
cytoskeleton and nucleoskeleton are physically connected through Linker of Nucleus and
Cytoskeleton (LINC) protein complexes [16] (Figure 1). Evidence is accumulating that
LINC complexes allow for the rapid mechanotransduction of signals from the cytoplasmic
membrane and cytoskeleton directly through the nuclear membrane to the nucleoskeleton,
enabling rapid gene expression responses (reviewed in [17]). It is thought that the LINC
complex is intimately involved in modulation of genome expression in response to mechan-
ical stimuli through chromatin remodeling and recruitment of DNA and RNA polymerases,
ligases, acetylases, methylases, and cyclin-dependent kinases, resulting in changes in
gene expression at the transcriptional, translational, post-translational, and epigenetic lev-
els [19,20]. The details of the myriad of eukaryotic mechanotransduction systems, though
not yet completely elucidated, are currently being actively investigated [17].
In the freefall environment of spaceﬂight, gravitational loading is negated. Numerous
studies using various cell types have shown that eukaryotic cells exhibit a morphological
sensitivity to microgravity, exposure to which can cause alterations in cell shape, size,
volume, and adherence properties [10,19,20]. These signals are converted into alterations
in chromosomal architecture, which in turn regulate the transcriptional apparatus [21].
In spaceﬂight research, this general “mechanotransduction” model successfully explains
the pathways for sensing and response to microgravity by plant and mammalian whole
organisms, as well as single eukaryotic cells [5,22,23]. It is unclear whether such responses
to microgravity are direct or indirect (resulting from, say, downstream effects of micro-
gravity on chemical gradients or ﬂuid shear). However, results from parabolic aircraft
and sounding rocket ﬂights demonstrated that the transcriptomes of human monocytes
responded immediately—within seconds—after exposure to microgravity or hypergravity
(1.8 × g) [24] suggesting that, in this case at least, gravity or its absence is exerting a direct
effect on gene expression.
3. Does a Microbial Analog of Eukaryotic Mechanotransduction Exist?
In contrast to our relatively detailed understanding of the eukaryotic microgravity
response in terms of mechanosensing and mechanotransduction mechanisms, no such
detailed model exists to explain how prokaryotes respond to gravity in general, much less
to spaceﬂight microgravity. The origins of this situation can be traced back to an inﬂuential
and often-cited theoretical study from 1965 asserting that microorganisms smaller than
10 micrometers should not be able to perceive gravitational forces [25]. Despite a lack
of empirical evidence supporting this contention, it has nevertheless persisted in the
spaceﬂight microgravity literature over the ensuing half century (for reviews, see [8,26]).
Due to a lack of ﬂuid convection in microgravity, spaceﬂight has been considered to
be a quiescent environment characterized by low hydrodynamic shear and lack of con-
vective transfer of mass and heat [26]. To emulate this low-shear environment on Earth,
various rotating devices called clinostats have been developed and utilized as microgravity
analog systems [27,28]. Early experiments cultivating microbes in clinostats indicated that
certain phenotypes such as microcin B17 production by Escherichia coli [29] and virulence in
Salmonella enterica [30] were altered in the clinostat environment. These and similar observa-
tions led to the notion of mechanotransduction as a possible mechanism for a microgravity
response in prokaryotes, proposed in a 2004 review [9]. Numerous subsequent investiga-
tions have been conducted to characterize the response of various microorganisms to the
low ﬂuid shear environment using both spaceﬂight and clinorotation ([31–35]; reviewed
extensively in [7,8,26]). These studies clearly established a role for hydrodynamic shear
stress, or its absence, in inﬂuencing some aspects of gene expression and some phenotypes
in some, but not all, bacteria tested [7,8]. Subsequent work mapping transcriptomic re-
sponses of S. enterica and Pseudomonas aeruginosa to spaceﬂight and clinorotation identiﬁed
the molecular chaperone and global regulator Hfq as being implicated in the low-shear re-
sponse, although its mechanism of action is currently unknown [33,34,36]. Several studies

Life 2021, 11, 33
4 of 11
have mapped global transcriptomic responses of bacteria to the low-shear environment,
comparing cells grown in spaceﬂight and clinostat conditions with corresponding ground
controls [33,34,36–39], but to date, these studies have failed to yield insights into a detailed
underlying molecular mechanism [40,41].
3.1. Microbial Internal Structure
If we are to draw upon the eukaryotic mechanotransduction model of spaceﬂight
signal transduction as depicted in Figure 1 and extend it to microbes, it is worthwhile
ﬁrst to review our current understanding of the internal structure of prokaryotes, paying
particular attention to structures involved in mechanosensing and mechanotransduction.
Our understanding of the interior architecture of living microbial cells has lagged behind
that of eukaryotes, due to their small size at the limits of optical resolution and the lack
of techniques for mechanical manipulation of such small cells [42,43]. Indeed, until rela-
tively recently the interior of the prokaryotic cell was thought to be an unordered “bag of
enzymes” with little or no intracellular compartmentalization [44]. Advances in molecular
biology, microscopic imaging technologies, and the development of ﬂuorescent molecular
tags have changed this view radically within the past two decades; microbial cells are
now known to exhibit a high level of subcellular organization rivaling that of eukaryotic
cells [45–47].
As was mentioned in a previous review [9], microbes possess both functional and
structural analogs of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton; indeed, cytoskeletal components from
all three domains of life (Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya) are phylogenetically related,
indicating their descent from a common ancestor early in evolution [48]. An updated
comparison of eukaryotic and prokaryotic cytoskeletal analogs is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Comparison of cytoskeletal analogs 1.
Eukaryotic Cytoskeletal
Structure
Eukaryotic
Subunit Analogs
Prokaryotic
Subunit Analogs
Function in Prokaryotes
Microtubules
α-Tubulin, β-Tubulin
FtsZ
Cytokinesis
TubZ
DNA positioning
RepX
Plasmid replication
Microﬁlaments
Actin Superfamily
MreB
Cell shape, chromosome
segregation
FtsA
Cytokinesis
ParM
DNA segregation
Intermediate Filaments
Keratins, Vimentin, Desmin,
Neuroﬁlament Proteins, Lamins
CreS (crescentin)
Cell shape
1 Adapted from [48].
As can be seen in Table 1, numerous proteins belonging to both the actin and tubu-
lin superfamilies of eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins have been identiﬁed in Bacteria and
Archaea. In addition to the canonical actin/tubulin/intermediate ﬁlament superfamilies,
prokaryotes contain a large number of ﬁlament-forming proteins that do not have eu-
karyotic homologs, such as ParA/B, MinC/D, and bactoﬁlins [49]. Many of these protein
ﬁlaments organize collaboratively through interactions between themselves and supra-
macromolecular structures such as the bacterial membrane, cell wall, and nucleoid [49].
In prokaryotic cells, internal ﬁlaments serve a variety of functions, including: organizing
cell division; control of cell shape; organization and segregation of chromosomal, plas-
mid, and phage DNA; membrane remodeling; organization of cell wall synthesis; and
scaffolding of spore structures in spore-forming Firmicutes [45–47,50]. In addition, in many
cases cytoskeletal ﬁlaments have been directly visualized and characterized in prokary-
otic cells using high-resolution ﬂuorescence microscopy and cryo-electron microscopy
techniques [50,51].
3.2. Mechanosensing in Prokaryotes
Since the early days of microbiology in the 19th century, prokaryotes have been
known to monitor and respond to their external chemical environment [52]. More recently,

Life 2021, 11, 33
5 of 11
microbes have also been shown to respond to mechanical forces such as ﬂuid ﬂow, pressure,
and contact with surfaces or other cells [9,45,46]. Similar to eukaryotic cells, bacteria
possess mechanosensory proteins either displayed on the cell surface (e.g., adhesins) or
extending into the extracellular environment (e.g., ﬂagella, pili). Proteins residing in the
cell envelope can sense and respond to deformations of the cell surface. The integral
membrane proteins MscS and MscL sense membrane deformation resulting from osmotic
stress and respond by opening or closing their pores to allow passage of osmotically active
solutes (e.g., potassium, glutamate, or trehalose) in order to maintain osmotic balance and
turgor pressure [53]. Adhesins present on the cell surface are able to sense forces such as
shear, compression, or tension and transduce these signals to the cell interior, activating the
production of second messenger molecules such as cAMP and cyclic di-GMP which in turn
activate or repress transcription of target genes [45]. Protein ﬁlaments such as ﬂagella and
Type IV pili are anchored in the cell surface and extend into the extracellular environment.
These structures have long been associated with motility (ﬂagella) and adhesion (pili), but
recently have also been implicated in the regulation of gene expression via mechanosensing
and mechanotransduction mechanisms (reviewed in [46]). For example, motility of Gram-
positive Bacillus subtilis cells through liquid media is due to the rotation of helical ﬂagella
driven by rotary motors embedded in the cell membrane. Contact of cells with a surface
increases the torque applied onto ﬂagella, inhibiting their rotation. This rotational inhibition
increases strain on the ﬂagellar motor embedded in the membrane, which generates a signal
sensed by the two-component system histidine kinase DegS. DegS in turn phosphorylates
the DegU response regulator, and phosphorylated DegU up-regulates the transcription of
an entire class of genes involved in bioﬁlm production [54,55]. Thus, an outside mechanical
force can be sensed by a bacterial cell and transduced to the transcriptional apparatus to
dramatically change its phenotype from a solitary free-swimming cell to a sessile member
of a bioﬁlm community.
3.3. Mechanotransduction in Prokaryotes
In the above examples, perception of mechanical stress was shown to trigger classic
chemical transducers, such as second messengers or two-component systems, to effect
altered gene expression. Such mechanisms do not rely on mechanotransduction through a
cytoskeleton. Indeed, at present cytoskeletal mechanotransduction in prokaryotes has been
much less thoroughly investigated than its eukaryotic counterpart, although recent studies
have begun to uncover the roles played by prokaryotic cytoskeletal protein homologs in
the regulation of cell physiology. Some examples follow.
3.3.1. Cell Growth and Division
The prokaryotic cell wall is a dynamic network of peptidoglycan (PG) making up
the sacculus that maintains cell shape, resists lysis of the cell by turgor pressure, and
which must accommodate cell growth in varying environments. Morphogenesis of the cell
wall is ultimately governed by cytoskeletal proteins (reviewed recently in [56]). At least
two distinct machineries exist to accomplish this feat, the elongasome and the divisome.
Filaments of MreB, FtsZ, and FtsA proteins serve to organize and direct the growth and
division machinery to their proper locations.
The elongasome is responsible for the insertion of new PG into the growing sacculus
and is organized by the actin homolog MreB (Table 1). MreB ﬁlaments move circumferen-
tially around rod-shaped cells and organize the multiprotein PG synthetic machinery to
add PG in a helical fashion along the cell cylinder, allowing cell length to increase [49].
The divisome is the molecular machine responsible for cell separation (cytokinesis)
under the control of the tubulin homolog FtsZ and the actin homolog FtsA (Table 1). FtsZ
ﬁlaments organize into a centrally located ring-shaped structure (the Z-ring) that directs
the PG machinery to produce the division septum during cytokinesis [56]. Cytokinesis also
involves the separation of the cell membrane. FtsA forms ﬁlaments that directly interact
with FtsZ ﬁlaments and anchor the constricting Z-ring to the cytoplasmic membrane, ensur-

Life 2021, 11, 33
6 of 11
ing that all layers of the cell envelope are constricted and separated during cytokinesis [49].
In addition, placement of the division septum at mid-cell and suppression of division at the
cell poles is accomplished by ﬁlaments of DivIVA, MinC, and MinD which form a complex
structure at the cell poles [49].
3.3.2. DNA Division, Repair, and Gene Expression
In prokaryotes, ﬁlament-forming proteins perform numerous functions on DNA in-
cluding chromosome division, chromosome and plasmid segregation, DNA repair, and
regulation of gene expression (reviewed in [49]). The actin homolog MreB is involved with
the initial stages of bacterial chromosome segregation coupled with DNA synthesis [57].
With help of ParB, the ParA protein forms collaborative ﬁlaments with DNA and is in-
volved with chromosome movement and segregation during cell division using a currently
unknown mechanism [49]. The RecA protein is central both in DNA repair and homolo-
gous recombination; it binds and forms ﬁlaments with both single- and double-stranded
DNA and has been shown to exert cytomotive properties in the movement of DNA during
double-strand break repair [49]. H-NS proteins are a class of transcriptional repressors
that nucleate at speciﬁc regulatory sequences and form stiff collaborative ﬁlaments that
sterically hinder RNA polymerase from binding to promoters in the vicinity. It is estimated
H-NS regulates the transcription of up to 5% of the genes in E. coli [49]. However, at
present, the mechanism(s) of exactly how cytoskeletal ﬁlaments are involved in coordinat-
ing DNA synthesis and chromosomal division with membrane and cell wall synthesis and
cytokinesis in prokaryotes is currently unknown and an active area of research.
3.4. Prokaryotic Nucleoid Architecture
The prokaryotic counterpart of the eukaryotic nucleus is the bacterial chromosome
or nucleoid. The nucleoid consists of genomic DNA in a complex with its complement of
nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs). The nucleoid is not bounded by its own membrane
and is in direct contact with the cytoplasm. In the last two decades, using ﬂuorescence
microscopy to track chromosomal loci inside bacteria cells, researchers have found that
bacterial chromosomes are organized into stereotypical patterns, with speciﬁc chromo-
somal regions localizing to deﬁned cellular locations (reviewed in [58]). Over the past
few years, the application of genome-wide high-resolution chromosome conformation
capture (Hi-C) assays to bacteria has provided a detailed picture of the three-dimensional
folding characteristics of the entire chromosome. In parallel, super-resolution microscopy
techniques have strongly advanced our knowledge of bacterial nucleoid organization.
It is increasingly appreciated that the nucleoid adopts a speciﬁc architecture, which
alters dramatically in response to the growth phase, cellular development, and environ-
mental changes. Recent Hi-C studies of a number of bacterial species provided insights
into the three-dimensional folding of the bacterial chromosome. In Caulobacter crescentus
and B. subtilis, but not E. coli, the chromosome exhibits long-range interactions. The two
replication arms are juxtaposed from the origin to the terminus region, mediated by the
SMC condensin complex [59–63]. For all three bacterial species, the genome along its entire
length is organized into chromosome interaction domains (CIDs), ranging from ~30 to
>400 kilobase pairs. Regions within each domain interact with each other more frequently
than with regions in other domains. The domain boundaries are often enriched with
highly transcribed genes, and inhibition of transcription essentially abolishes all domain
boundaries [59,63], indicating that the 3D architecture of the nucleoid is intimately linked
to transcription.
3.5. DNA Supercoiling
The nucleoid is a highly condensed structure that must allow the replication and tran-
scription machinery to access speciﬁc genes in a coordinated fashion, in order to optimize
cell metabolism and replication under a wide range of environmental conditions [64]. To
accomplish this feat, selected parts of the nucleoid are constantly and dynamically de- and

Life 2021, 11, 33
7 of 11
re-condensed in response to environmental signals. Dynamic restructuring of the nucleoid
depends critically on a host of enzymes that control DNA topology, collectively known
as topoisomerases, which maintain DNA in an optimal state of negative supercoiling.
Transcription of a gene is dependent upon the local DNA superhelical state, and in turn,
the transcription process itself inﬂuences DNA supercoiling, by overwinding DNA ahead
of the transcription complex and underwinding it behind (reviewed in [65]). A growing
body of evidence points to changes in DNA supercoiling as being a key mediator between
environmental sensing by a microbe and its response through modulation of global tran-
scription patterns. It has been shown experimentally that DNA supercoiling is sensitive to
variations in the physical environment such as: pH, oxygen, temperature, osmotic pressure,
oxidative stress, nutrition, and growth phase, among others (reviewed in [66]). In turn, it
has also been shown experimentally that alterations in DNA supercoiling can inﬂuence
the global pattern of bacterial gene transcription, and ultimately the phenotypic response
to environmental changes (reviewed in [66]). Historically, most studies in this area have
been performed using Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli, S. enterica, Vibrio cholerae); how-
ever, these investigations have been recently extended to the Gram-positive opportunist
Streptococcus pneumoniae [67]. Recent evidence suggests active transcription drives the for-
mation of boundaries between CIDs [68], likely through alterations in DNA topology [65],
thus highlighting the three-way interactions between nucleoid architecture, supercoiling,
and transcription.
3.6. Epigenetic Modiﬁcation of DNA
Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene expression that occur without
changes in DNA sequence (reviewed in [69]). In bacteria, the most-studied epigenetic
modiﬁcation of DNA is base methylation. Speciﬁc DNA methyltransferases are responsible
for the post-replicative addition of a methyl group to the N6-position of adenine (6mA), the
C5-position of cytosine (5mC), or the N4-position of cytosine (4mC) [70]. Base methylation
can modulate the interaction of DNA-binding proteins with their cognate sites, and methy-
lation of DNA controls genome defense, chromosome replication and segregation, nucleoid
organization, cell cycle control, DNA repair, and regulation of transcription (reviewed
in [71]). In particular, a number of speciﬁc systems have been described in which gene
transcription is directly regulated by DNA methylation/demethylation/hemimethylation
([72–77]; reviewed in [71]). Furthermore, both nucleoid organization and chromosome
replication are controlled by DNA methylation [78,79]. Therefore, the available evidence
indicates that nucleoid architecture, DNA supercoiling, epigenetic DNA modiﬁcation, and
transcription are all tightly linked in prokaryotes.
4. Does Mechanotransduction Play a Role in the Prokaryotic Microgravity Response?
From the examination of the studies cited above, we have seen that eukaryotic cells
possess mechanosensing and mechanotransduction systems that modulate their gene ex-
pression in response to microgravity. Further, we have seen from the results of recent
studies utilizing model bacterial species that it is becoming increasingly clear that prokary-
otes also possess complex intracellular compartmentalization, analogs of cytoskeletal
proteins, and sophisticated signal transduction networks comparable to those of eukary-
otic cells. These networks serve to sense external environmental cues through surface
structures and to transmit this information to the transcription apparatus via traditional
signaling pathways such as two-component systems. From the available information and
by analogy, we hypothesize that the prokaryotic cytoskeletal apparatus functions in an
analogous manner to its eukaryotic counterpart. We further propose that the microbial
cytoskeleton plays a key role in transducing mechanical changes sensed at the cell surface
to the nucleoid, altering its architecture and the global transcriptional apparatus. Testing
of this hypothesis will necessitate conducting new types of experiments in the spaceﬂight
environment, such as: visualization of cytoskeletal structures, mapping of nucleoid archi-
tecture, and measurements of DNA supercoiling and methylation patterns, to name a few.

Life 2021, 11, 33
8 of 11
As many of these measurements can be very sensitive to differences in sample handling, it
will be of high importance in this endeavor to match as precisely as possible media and
growth conditions, spaceﬂight hardware, and pre- and post-ﬂight sample handling, to
eliminate all possible variables with the exception of gravity. Ideally, it would be preferable
to perform all exposures in the microgravity environment (providing 1 × g by centrifuga-
tion) and to perform all inoculations, ﬁxations, freezing, etc. at the same time and using
the same protocols. Results from such experiments hold the promise for uncovering a
new and fundamental mechanism for microbial adaptation to spaceﬂight microgravity,
mechanosensing and mechanotransduction.
Author Contributions: P.F.-C. and W.L.N. conceived and wrote the manuscript. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by a grant (80NSSC21K0319) from the NASA Space Biology
program.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Xindan Wang for helpful discussions of Hi-C chromosome
capture methodology.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Demets, R. Biology on sounding rockets: History, requirements, results, and scientiﬁc interpretation. In Proceedings of the 20th
Symposium on European Rocket and Balloon Programmes and Related Research, Hyère, France, 22–26 May 2011; Ouwehand, L.,
Ed.; ESA Communications: Hyère, France, 2011; pp. 63–66.
2.
Pietsch, J.; Bauer, J.; Egli, M.; Infanger, M.; Wise, P.; Ulbrich, C.; Grimm, D. The effects of weightlessness on the human organism
and mammalian cells. Curr. Mol. Med. 2011, 11, 350–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Lychakov, D.V. Behavioural and functional vestibular disorders after space ﬂight: 2. Fish, amphibians and birds. J. Evol. Biochem.
Physiol. 2016, 52, 1–16. [CrossRef]
4.
Vandenbrink, J.P.; Kiss, J.Z. Space, the ﬁnal frontier: A critical review of recent experiments performed in microgravity. Plant. Sci.
2016, 243, 115–119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Hader, D.P.; Braun, M.; Grimm, D.; Hemmersbach, R. Gravireceptors in eukaryotes-a comparison of case studies on the cellular
level. NPJ Microgravity 2017, 3, 8. [CrossRef]
6.
Rosenzweig, J.A.; Abogunde, O.; Thomas, K.; Lawal, A.; Nguyen, Y.U.; Sodipe, A.; Jejelowo, O. Spaceﬂight and modeled
microgravity effects on microbial growth and virulence. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010, 85, 885–891. [CrossRef]
7.
Rosenzweig, J.A.; Ahmed, S.; Eunson, J.; Chopra, A.K. Low-shear force associated with modeled microgravity and spaceﬂight
does not similarly impact the virulence of notable bacterial pathogens. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014. [CrossRef]
8.
Taylor, P.W. Impact of space ﬂight on bacterial virulence and antibiotic susceptibility. Infect. Drug Resist. 2015, 8, 249–262.
[CrossRef]
9.
Nickerson, C.A.; Ott, C.M.; Wilson, J.W.; Ramamurthy, R.; Pierson, D.L. Microbial responses to microgravity and other low-shear
environments. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2004, 68, 345–361. [CrossRef]
10.
Najrana, T.; Sanchez-Esteban, J. Mechanotransduction as an adaptation to gravity. Front. Pediatr 2016, 4, 140. [CrossRef]
11.
DuFort, C.C.; Paszek, M.J.; Weaver, V.M. Balancing forces: Architectural control of mechanotransduction. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biology 2011, 12, 308–319. [CrossRef]
12.
Luo, T.; Mohan, K.; Iglesias, P.A.; Robinson, D.N. Molecular mechanisms of cellular mechanosensing. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12,
1064–1071. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Moulia, B.; Coutand, C.; Julien, J.L. Mechanosensitive control of plant growth: Bearing the load, sensing, transducing, and
responding. Front. Plant. Sci. 2015, 6, 20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Lindstrom, J.B.; Pierce, N.T.; Latz, M.I. Role of trp channels in dinoﬂagellate mechanotransduction. Biol. Bull. 2017, 233, 151–167.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Martino, F.; Perestrelo, A.R.; Vinarský, V.; Pagliari, S.; Forte, G. Cellular mechanotransduction: From tension to function. Front.
Physiol. 2018, 9, 824. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Sankaran, J.; Uzer, G.; van Wijnen, A.J.; Rubin, J. Gene regulation through dynamic actin control of nuclear structure. Exp. Biol.
Med. 2019, 244, 1345–1353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Piccus, R.; Brayson, D. The nuclear envelope: Lincing tissue mechanics to genome regulation in cardiac and skeletal muscle. Biol.
Lett. 2020, 16, 9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Life 2021, 11, 33
9 of 11
18.
Haswell, E.S.; Phillips, R.; Rees, D.C. Mechanosensitive channels: What can they do and how do they do it? Structure 2011, 19,
1356–1369. [CrossRef]
19.
Aventaggiato, M.; Barreca, F.; Vernucci, E.; Bizzarri, M.; Ferretti, E.; Russo, M.A.; Tafani, M. Putative receptors for gravity sensing
in mammalian cells: The effects of microgravity. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 28. [CrossRef]
20.
Bradbury, P.; Wu, H.; Choi, J.U.; Rowan, A.E.; Zhang, H.; Poole, K.; Lauko, J.; Chou, J. Modeling the impact of microgravity at the
cellular level: Implications for human disease. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2020, 8, 96. [CrossRef]
21.
Uhler, C.; Shivashankar, G.V. Regulation of genome organization and gene expression by nuclear mechanotransduction. Nat. Rev.
Molec. Cell Biol. 2017, 18, 717–727. [CrossRef]
22.
Paul, A.L.; Zupanska, A.K.; Schultz, E.R.; Ferl, R.J. Organ-speciﬁc remodeling of the Arabidopsis transcriptome in response to
spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol. 2013, 13, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Vorselen, D.; Roos, W.H.; MacKintosh, F.C.; Wuite, G.J.L.; van Loon, J. The role of the cytoskeleton in sensing changes in gravity
by nonspecialized cells. FASEB J. 2014, 28, 536–547. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Thiel, C.S.; Tauber, S.; Christoffel, S.; Huge, A.; Lauber, B.A.; Polzer, J.; Paulsen, K.; Lier, H.; Engelmann, F.; Schmitz, B.; et al.
Rapid coupling between gravitational forces and the transcriptome in human myelomonocytic U937 cells. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 13267.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.
Pollard, E.C. Theoretical studies on living systems in the absence of mechanical stress. J. Theor. Biol. 1965, 8, 113–123. [CrossRef]
26.
Horneck, G.; Klaus, D.M.; Mancinelli, R.L. Space microbiology. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2010, 74, 121–156. [CrossRef]
27.
Anken, R. Simulation of microgravity for studies in gravitational biology: Principles, devices, and applications. Curr. Biotechnol.
2013, 2, 192–200. [CrossRef]
28.
Herranz, R.; Anken, R.; Boonstra, J.; Braun, M.; Christianen, P.C.; de Geest, M.; Hauslage, J.; Hilbig, R.; Hill, R.J.; Lebert, M.; et al.
Ground-based facilities for simulation of microgravity: Organism-speciﬁc recommendations for their use, and recommended
terminology. Astrobiology 2013, 13, 1–17. [CrossRef]
29.
Fang, A.; Pierson, D.L.; Koenig, D.W.; Mishra, S.K.; Demain, A.L. Effect of simulated microgravity and shear stress on microcin
B17 production by Escherichia coli and on its excretion into the medium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1997, 63, 4090–4092. [CrossRef]
30.
Nickerson, C.A.; Ott, C.M.; Mister, S.J.; Morrow, B.J.; Burns-Keliher, L.; Pierson, D.L. Microgravity as a novel environmental
signal affecting Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium virulence. Infect. Immun. 2000, 68, 3147–3152. [CrossRef]
31.
Crabbé, A.; Nielsen-Preiss, S.M.; Woolley, C.M.; Barrila, J.; Buchanan, K.; McCracken, J.; Inglis, D.O.; Searles, S.C.; Nelman-
Gonzalez, M.A.; Ott, C.M.; et al. Spaceﬂight enhances cell aggregation and random budding in Candida albicans. PLoS ONE 2013,
8, e80677. [CrossRef]
32.
Aunins, T.R.; Erickson, K.E.; Prasad, N.; Levy, S.E.; Jones, A.; Shrestha, S.; Mastracchio, R.; Stodieck, L.; Klaus, D.; Zea, L.; et al.
Spaceﬂight modiﬁes Escherichia coli gene expression in response to antibioticc exposure and reveals role of oxidative stress
response. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Crabbé, A.; Schurr, M.J.; Monsieurs, P.; Morici, L.; Schurr, J.; Wilson, J.W.; Ott, C.M.; Tsaprailis, G.; Pierson, D.L.; Stefanyshyn-
Piper, H.; et al. Transcriptional and proteomic responses of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 to spaceﬂight conditions involve Hfq
regulation and reveal a role for oxygen. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2011, 77, 1221–1230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Wilson, J.W.; Ott, C.M.; Bentrup, K.H.Z.; Ramamurthy, R.; Quick, L.; Porwollik, S.; Cheng, P.; McClelland, M.; Tsaprailis, G.;
Radabaugh, T.; et al. Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence and reveals a role for global regulator Hfq. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2007, 104, 16299–16304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Li, J.; Liu, F.; Wang, Q.; Ge, P.; Woo, P.C.; Yan, J.; Zhao, Y.; Gao, G.F.; Liu, C.H.; Liu, C. Genomic and transcriptomic analysis of
NDM-1 Klebsiella pneumoniae in spaceﬂight reveal mechanisms underlying environmental adaptability. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 6216.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Crabbé, A.; Pycke, B.; Van Houdt, R.; Monsieurs, P.; Nickerson, C.; Leys, N.; Cornelis, P. Response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PAO1 to low shear modelled microgravity involves AlgU regulation. Environ. Microbiol. 2010, 12, 1545–1564. [PubMed]
37.
Mastroleo, F.; Van Houdt, R.; Leroy, B.; Benotmane, M.A.; Janssen, A.; Mergeay, M.; Vanhavere, F.; Hendrickx, L.; Wattiez, R.;
Leys, N. Experimental design and environmental parameters affect Rhodospirillum rubrum S1H response to space ﬂight. ISME J.
2009, 3, 1402–1419. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Morrison, M.D.; Fajardo-Cavazos, P.; Nicholson, W.L. Comparison of Bacillus subtilis transcriptome proﬁles from two separate
missions to the International Space Station. NPJ Microgravity 2019, 5, 1. [CrossRef]
39.
Wilson, J.W.; Ott, C.M.; Quick, L.; Davis, R.; Bentrup, K.H.Z.; Crabbé, A.; Richter, E.; Sarker, S.; Barrila, J.; Porwollik, S.; et al. Media
ion composition controls regulatory and virulence response of Salmonella in spaceﬂight. PLoS ONE 2008, 3, e3923. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
40.
Morrison, M.D.; Nicholson, W.L. Meta-analysis of data from spaceﬂight transcriptome experiments does not support the idea of a
common bacterial “spaceﬂight response”. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 14403. [CrossRef]
41.
Morrison, M.D.; Nicholson, W.L. Comparisons of transcriptome proﬁles from Bacillus subtilis cells grown in space versus High
Aspect Ratio Vessel (HARV) clinostats reveal a low degree of concordance. Astrobiology 2020, 20, 1498–1509. [CrossRef]
42.
Kentner, D.; Sourjik, V. Use of ﬂuorescence microscopy to study intracellular signaling in bacteria. In Annual Review of Microbiology;
Gottesman, S., Harwood, C.S., Eds.; Palo Alto: Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2010; Volume 64, pp. 373–390.
43.
Guerrero, R.; Berlanga, M. The hidden side of the prokaryotic cell: Rediscovering the microbial world. Int. Microbiol. 2007, 10,
157–168. [PubMed]

Life 2021, 11, 33
10 of 11
44.
Saier, M.H. Microcompartments and protein machines in prokaryotes. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2013, 23, 243–269. [CrossRef]
45.
Dufrene, Y.F.; Persat, A. Mechanomicrobiology: How bacteria sense and respond to forces. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2020, 14, 227–240.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Persat, A. Bacterial mechanotransduction. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2017, 36, 1–6. [CrossRef]
47.
Rudner, D.Z.; Losick, R. Protein subcellular localization in bacteria. Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol. 2010, 2, 14. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
48.
Wickstead, B.; Gull, K. The evolution of the cytoskeleton. J. Cell Biol. 2011, 194, 513–525. [CrossRef]
49.
Ghosal, D.; Löwe, J. Collaborative protein ﬁlaments. EMBO J. 2015, 34, 2312–2320. [CrossRef]
50.
Wagstaff, J.; Löwe, J. Prokaryotic cytoskeletons: Protein ﬁlaments organizing small cells. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2018, 16, 187–201.
[CrossRef]
51.
Celler, K.; Koning, R.I.; Koster, A.J.; van Wezel, G.P. Multidimensional view of the bacterial cytoskeleton. J. Bacteriol. 2013, 195,
1627–1636. [CrossRef]
52.
Schaechter, M. A brief history of bacterial growth physiology. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 5. [CrossRef]
53.
Booth, I.R. Bacterial mechanosensitive channels: Progress towards an understanding of their roles in cell physiology. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 2014, 18, 16–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Chan, J.M.; Guttenplan, S.B.; Kearns, D.B. Defects in the ﬂagellar motor increase synthesis of poly-gamma-glutamate in Bacillus
subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 2014, 196, 740–753. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Cairns, L.S.; Marlow, V.L.; Bissett, E.; Ostrowski, A.; Stanley-Wall, N.R. A mechanical signal transmitted by the ﬂagellum controls
signalling in Bacillus subtilis. Mol. Microbiol. 2013, 90, 6–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Egan, A.J.F.; Errington, J.; Vollmer, W. Regulation of peptidoglycan synthesis and remodelling. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2020, 18,
446–460. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Thanbichler, M.; Shapiro, L. Chromosome organization and segregation in bacteria. J. Struct. Biol. 2006, 156, 292–303. [CrossRef]
58.
Wang, X.D.; Rudner, D.Z. Spatial organization of bacterial chromosomes. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2014, 22, 66–72. [CrossRef]
59.
Le, T.B.K.; Imakaev, M.V.; Mirny, L.A.; Laub, M.T. High-resolution mapping of the spatial organization of a bacterial chromosome.
Science 2013, 342, 731–734. [CrossRef]
60.
Lioy, V.S.; Cournac, A.; Marbouty, M.; Duigou, S.; Mozziconacci, J.; Espéli, O.; Boccard, F.; Koszul, R. Multiscale structuring of the
E. coli chromosome by nucleoid-associated and condensin proteins. Cell 2018, 172, 771–783.e718. [CrossRef]
61.
Marbouty, M.; Le Gall, A.; Cattoni, D.I.; Cournac, A.; Koh, A.; Fiche, J.B.; Mozziconacci, J.; Murray, H.; Koszul, R.; Nollmann,
M. Condensin- and replication-mediated bacterial chromosome folding and origin condensation revealed by Hi-C and super-
resolution imaging. Mol. Cell 2015, 59, 588–602. [CrossRef]
62.
Wang, X.D.; Le, T.B.K.; Lajoie, B.R.; Dekker, J.; Laub, M.T.; Rudner, D.Z. Condensin promotes the juxtaposition of DNA ﬂanking
its loading site in Bacillus subtilis. Genes Dev. 2015, 29, 1661–1675. [CrossRef]
63.
Wang, X.D.; Brandao, H.B.; Le, T.B.K.; Laub, M.T.; Rudner, D.Z. Bacillus subtilis SMC complexes juxtapose chromosome arms as
they travel from origin to terminus. Science 2017, 355, 524–527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Benza, V.G.; Bassetti, B.; Dorfman, K.D.; Scolari, V.F.; Bromek, K.; Cicuta, P.; Lagomarsino, M.C. Physical descriptions of the
bacterial nucleoid at large scales, and their biological implications. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2012, 75, 20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Dorman, C.J. DNA supercoiling and transcription in bacteria: A two-way street. BMC Mol. Cell Biol. 2019, 20, 9. [CrossRef]
66.
Dorman, C.J.; Dorman, M.J. DNA supercoiling is a fundamental regulatory principle in the control of bacterial gene expression.
Biophys. Rev. 2016, 8, 209–220. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
de la Campa, A.G.; Ferrándiz, M.J.; Martín-Galiano, A.J.; García, M.T.; Tirado-Vélez, J.M. The transcriptome of Streptococcus
pneumoniae induced by local and global changes in supercoiling. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1447. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Le, T.B.K.; Laub, M.T. Transcription rate and transcript length drive formation of chromosomal interaction domain boundaries.
EMBO J. 2016, 35, 1582–1595. [CrossRef]
69.
Atack, J.M.; Tan, A.; Bakaletz, L.O.; Jennings, M.P.; Seib, K.L. Phasevarions of bacterial pathogens: Methylomics sheds new light
on old enemies. Trends Microbiol. 2018, 26, 715–726. [CrossRef]
70.
Sanchez-Romero, M.A.; Cota, I.; Casadesus, J. DNA methylation in bacteria: From the methyl group to the methylome. Curr.
Opin. Microbiol. 2015, 25, 9–16. [CrossRef]
71.
Sanchez-Romero, M.A.; Casadesús, J. The bacterial epigenome. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2020, 18, 7–20. [CrossRef]
72.
Gonzalez, D.; Kozdon, J.B.; McAdams, H.H.; Shapiro, L.; Collier, J. The functions of DNA methylation by CcrM in Caulobacter
crescentus: A global approach. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, 3720–3735. [CrossRef]
73.
Cota, I.; Bunk, B.; Spröer, C.; Overmann, J.; König, C.; Casadesús, J. OxyR-dependent formation of DNA methylation patterns in
OpvABOFF and OpvABON cell lineages of Salmonella enterica. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44, 3595–3609. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Camacho, E.M.; Casadesús, J. Regulation of traJ transcription in the Salmonella virulence plasmid by strand-speciﬁc DNA adenine
hemimethylation. Mol. Microbiol. 2005, 57, 1700–1718. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Fioravanti, A.; Fumeaux, C.; Mohapatra, S.S.; Bompard, C.; Brilli, M.; Frandi, A.; Castric, V.; Villeret, V.; Viollier, P.H.; Biondi, E.G.
DNA binding of the cell cycle transcriptional regulator gcrA depends on N6-adenosine methylation in Caulobacter crescentus and
other Alphaproteobacteria. PLoS Genet. 2013, 9, e1003541. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Broadbent, S.E.; Davies, M.R.; van der Woude, M.W. Phase variation controls expression of Salmonella lipopolysaccharide
modiﬁcation genes by a DNA methylation-dependent mechanism. Mol. Microbiol. 2010, 77, 337–353. [CrossRef]

Life 2021, 11, 33
11 of 11
77.
Nou, X.; Skinner, B.; Braaten, B.; Blyn, L.; Hirsch, D.; Low, D. Regulation of pyelonephritis-associated pili phase-variation in
Escherichia coli: Binding of the PapI and the Lrp regulatory proteins is controlled by DNA methylation. Mol. Microbiol. 1993, 7,
545–553. [CrossRef]
78.
Sánchez-Romero, M.A.; Busby, S.J.; Dyer, N.P.; Ott, S.; Millard, A.D.; Grainger, D.C. Dynamic distribution of SeqA protein across
the chromosome of Escherichia coli K-12. MBio 2010, 1. [CrossRef]
79.
Waldminghaus, T.; Weigel, C.; Skarstad, K. Replication fork movement and methylation govern SeqA binding to the Escherichia
coli chromosome. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012, 40, 5465–5476. [CrossRef]
