ARTICLE
OPEN
Microgravity enhances the phenotype of Arabidopsis zigzag-1
and reduces the Wortmannin-induced vacuole fusion
in root cells
Mengying Wang
1, Katherine Danz1, Vanessa Ly1 and Marcela Rojas-Pierce
1✉
The spaceﬂight environment of the International Space Station poses a multitude of stresses on plant growth including reduced
gravity. Plants exposed to microgravity and other conditions on the ISS display root skewing, changes in gene expression and
protein abundance that may result in changes in cell wall composition, antioxidant accumulation and modiﬁcation of growth
anisotropy. Systematic studies that address the effects of microgravity on cellular organelles are lacking but altered numbers and
sizes of vacuoles have been detected in previous ﬂights. The prominent size of plant vacuoles makes them ideal models to study
organelle dynamics in space. Here, we used Arabidopsis zigzag-1 (zig-1) as a sensitized genotype to study the effect of microgravity
on plant vacuole fusion. Wortmannin was used to induce vacuole fusion in seedlings and a formaldehyde-based ﬁxation protocol
was developed to visualize plant vacuole morphology after sample return, using confocal microscopy. Our results indicate that
microgravity enhances the zig-1 phenotype by reducing hypocotyl growth and vacuole fusion in some cells. This study
demonstrates the feasibility of chemical inhibitor treatments for plant cell biology experiments in space.
npj Microgravity  (2022) 8:38 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-022-00226-3
INTRODUCTION
Growing healthy plants in space is a major goal towards the
viability of long-term space missions as plants can provide food
for astronauts and beneﬁt mental health. The space environment
includes multiple stresses for plant growth including different
levels of gravity, radiation, decreased nutrient delivery and water
recycling1,2. The International Space Station provides an ideal
experimental setting for the study of plant growth and develop-
ment under space conditions and many experiments have been
conducted with plants on the ISS1,3. Reduced gravity on the ISS
results in disoriented plant growth unless light is provided to
activate directional growth from phototropism. Effects of the
spaceﬂight environment on the ISS include reduced cell elonga-
tion4 or altered cell division5 in roots. At the cellular level, the
microtubule and actin cytoskeletons as well as the cell wall are
altered under microgravity6–8. Other cellular organelles are altered
under microgravity conditions include mitochondria, plastids and
ER6. Interestingly, vacuole numbers increased in root apical cells
for Arabidopsis seedlings grown on the ISS9, and vacuole volume
increases in certain cells in microgravity10,11. Moreover, proteins
involved in intracellular membrane trafﬁcking were found to show
altered abundance in microgravity12–14. Those results suggest
vacuolar development as well as trafﬁcking are disrupted in
microgravity, but overall, there is a large gap in documenting the
effect of spaceﬂight on the organization of cellular organelles15.
The plant vacuole is a large essential organelle in plant cells and
is important for cell elongation, recycling, and storage, among
many other functions16–18. Vacuole enlargement is concomitant
with cell growth along the developmental gradient represented
by the longitudinal axis of the root. Vacuole enlargement along
this gradient requires homotypic membrane fusion, which is
mediated by two conserved complexes, the homotypic vacuole
protein sorting (HOPS) and soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive
factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE)19. Both HOPS and the
vacuolar SNARE complexes have vacuole or pre-vacuole-speciﬁc
subunits that provide speciﬁcity to membrane fusion. The vacuolar
SNARE complex is formed by SYP22, VTI11, SYP51, and either
VAMP72720 or VAMP713/VAMP71121–23. A loss of function allele of
VTI11, zigzag1(zig-1), has fragmented vacuoles and showed
abnormal shoot gravitropism24–26. The zig-1 mutant also has short
hypocotyls, small and wrinkled rosette leaves and a zigzag-shaped
stem24,25. Wortmannin (WM), a chemical inhibitor of phosphoino-
sitide 3-kinase (PI3K), can induce vacuole fusion in zig-1 and
partially restore
its agravitropic
shoot phenotype26,27. WM-
induced vacuole fusion in zig-1 is fast and almost complete
vacuole fusion can be observed in roots within two hours26,27.
Given the large size of the vacuole in plant cells and the efﬁciency
of WM at inducing its fusion, this treatment represents a unique
assay for the study of organelle fusion in plants in space.
Plant specimens have been sent to space for fundamental
biology research since the 1960s1,3,28 and this resulted in the
design of speciﬁc hardware for optimal growth3,29. The Biological
Research in Canister-Petri Dish Fixation Unit (BRIC-PDFU) is a fully
contained hardware that has been used extensively with small
plant seedlings9,30–32 and it is suitable for chemical treatments in
space. Previous experiments involved storing liquid media or
ﬁxative solution inside the chamber of the PDFU for microbial
culture or plant tissue ﬁxation33–35. Cell biology research on the
ISS requires sample ﬁxation to preserve cell morphology. Chemical
ﬁxation in the ISS has been accomplished with non-coagulant
agents such as formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde9 but the latter
has high levels of autoﬂuorescence36. Direct ﬂuorescence micro-
scopy of ﬂuorescent proteins from ﬁxed tissues37,38 is an effective
approach to extract quantitative information of cell structure at
high samples size, but the viability of ﬂuorescence microscopy of
tissues ﬁxed in space has not been demonstrated given the
challenges imposed by the BRIC hardware.
1Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. ✉email: mrojasp@ncsu.edu
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

Here, we took advantage of the WM-induced vacuole fusion in
zig-1 to study the effect of microgravity on plant vacuole fusion.
Formaldehyde-based tissue ﬁxation in the BRIC-PDFU hardware
was used and GFP-tagged vacuoles were imaged post-ﬂight by
confocal microscopy. We detected a mild but signiﬁcant decrease
in plant vacuole fusion in zig-1 that highlights possible effects of
microgravity or other spaceﬂight stresses on vacuole biogenesis
and membrane fusion. This experiment also demonstrates the
feasibility of chemical treatment assays on the ISS which may
contribute to future cell biology research in this microgravity
environment.
RESULTS
Optimization of BRIC-24 workﬂow
The goal of BRIC-24 was to test whether vacuole fusion is affected
by the microgravity environment of the ISS. A previously
characterized vacuole fusion assay26,27 was implemented with
the BRIC-PDFU hardware. This assay takes advantage of the
accumulation of vacuoles in the zig-1 mutant and the rapid
induction of vacuole fusion in this mutant upon treatment with
Wortmannin (WM)27. Visualization of organelle morphology is
accomplished by confocal microscopy of a GFP-tagged vacuolar
marker (GFP-TIP2;1)39 and a mCherry-tagged ER marker (HDEL-
mCherry)40 previously characterized. Figure 1 describes the BRIC-
24 workﬂow as it was completed as part of the SpaceX-22 mission
in July of 2021. Thirty sterile seeds from WT (Columbia-0) or zig-1
were plated directly on Arabidopsis Growth Media (AGM) plates
before integration into the BRIC-PDFU hardware at Kennedy Space
Center. From this point, plates were maintained cold and in the
dark. Each PDFU was separately loaded with a treatment solution
(WM or DMSO control in AGM) as well as ﬁxative solution taking
advantage of the dual chamber of the PDFU hardware. The ﬁxative
solution was infused with N2 gas to enhance its long term stability
as described41. Four BRICs containing a total of 22 PDFUs and 2
HOBO temperature recorders were delivered to NASA’s cold
stowage facility prior to launch (Supplementary Table 1). Two days
after arriving at the ISS, BRICs were unpacked and allowed to
come up to the temperature of the ISS environment to promote
germination and growth. WM or DMSO control solutions were
applied at day 4 of seedling growth followed by ﬁxative solution
2 h later. BRICs were returned to a 4 °C storage compartment until
the return ﬂight 4 weeks later, de-integration and confocal
analysis at North Carolina State University.
BRIC-24 protocols that ﬁt the constraints of the ﬂight schedule
and hardware required considerations for storage of treatment
solutions in the BRIC hardware before actuation and the
preservation of treated and ﬁxed seedlings for up to 6 weeks
before imaging. First, we conﬁrmed that 30 μM working dilutions
of WM in liquid AGM buffer are still active after 2 weeks of storage
at 4 °C (Supplementary Fig. 1). Furthermore, we determined that
the formaldehyde-based ﬁxative solution was effective after
2 weeks storage (Supplementary Fig. 2). These results demon-
strated the feasibility of the BRIC-24 workﬂow.
Transfer of the treatment and ﬁxative solutions from the liquid
chambers of the PDFUs and into the plants is carried out by
astronauts in space, but this device does not allow for the removal
of the ﬁrst solution. Therefore, the ﬁxative solution would always
mix with the previously applied treatment solution. We then
tested the effectiveness of a variety of ﬁxative buffers and PFA
concentrations when mixed 1:1 with liquid AGM by visualization
the GFP-labeled tonoplast and the mCherry-labeled ER of ﬁxed
samples (Supplementary Fig. 3). A 4% working concentration of
PFA was used as the ﬁxative agent37,42. When PFA was directly
diluted in liquid AGM, the intensity of GFP ﬂuorescence was weak,
and the morphology of vacuole and ER were blurry compared to
live-seedling controls (Supplementary Fig. 3B, C). As most PFA
ﬁxation solutions are made in PBS and many variations exist, we
tested different PBS concentrations and mixed them 1:1 with
AGM. Fixative solutions in full (1x) PBS buffer as well as 0.5x PBS
yielded plants with high intensity of GFP, however, only the PFA
solution in 0.5x PBS showed the best preservation of vacuole
Fig. 1
Overview of the BRIC-24 experimental workﬂow. Sterilized Arabidopsis seeds (WT and zig-1 with GFP-TIP2;1) were plated onto AGM
media and stored at 4 °C before BRIC-PDFU integration. Each petri dish contained 30 seeds. Treatment solution (33 μm WM or DMSO buffer)
and ﬁxative were injected into the dual chamber of the PDFU. Plates were placed into each PDFUs and PDFUs were integrated into BRICs. Four
BRICs were then stored in a cold bag for the ﬂight. After 4 days of growth on the ISS, WM solution or DMSO control were applied to the
seedlings. The treatment lasted for 2 hours. The second actuation was conducted by applying ﬁxative solution to the seedlings. BRICs were
then kept at 4 °C and returned to NASA after splash down. Confocal imaging and data analysis were conducted at NCSU.
M. Wang et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

morphology (Supplementary Fig. 3D, E). In the case of the KPBS
buffer, a variation of PBS that contains K+ as an alkali metal cation
in addition to Na+ ion, vacuole morphology was acceptable, but
GFP intensity was diminished (Supplementary Fig. 3G, H). Weak
GFP signal was also detected for samples ﬁxed with ﬁxative in
MTSB buffer, a buffer typically used to preserve cytoskeleton in
plants43, (Supplementary Fig. 3I, J). PFA solutions in PPB and
Sorensen’s buffer were ineffective in preserving vacuole morphol-
ogy (Supplementary Fig. 3K, L). Preservation of ER morphology as
reported by the mCherry-HDEL marker was even more challen-
ging. Most ﬁxative solutions resulted in the accumulation of ER
aggregates and overall loss of ER structure, except for a PFA
solution in 0.25x KPBS (Supplementary Fig. 3H). This solution,
however, was not optimal for visualization of vacuoles. As vacuole
fusion was the primary target for this research, we selected the 4%
PFA solution in 0.5x PBS (Supplementary Fig. 3E) as the ﬁnal
ﬁxative concentration for the ﬂight experiment and did not
analyze ER morphology as part of BRIC-24.
One major concern for doing plant cell biology experiments in
space is that ﬁxed samples must be stored on the ISS for several
weeks before splash-down. We therefore tested whether 4 weeks
of storage would affect the intensity of GFP or the overall
preservation of vacuole morphology of ﬁxed samples. Several
experiments conﬁrmed that long term storage of these samples
would not signiﬁcantly affect their quality of preservation
(Supplementary Fig. 4) further supporting the feasibility of
BRIC-24.
Ground tests demonstrated feasibility of the vacuole fusion
assay using the BRIC-PDFU
Science (SVT) and Experiment (EVT) Veriﬁcation Tests were
completed at Kennedy Space Center on March and September
2020, respectively, to determine the feasibility of the experimental
workﬂow using the BRIC-PDFU hardware. The PDFU is an enclosed
environment where plants are exposed to dark conditions and
where plant growth or the effectiveness of chemical treatments
cannot be assessed in real time. It was important to test whether
WM treatment of WT and zig-1 inside the PDFU was equivalent to
treatments regularly done on plastic dishes. Both SVT and EVT
were used to optimize growth conditions in the PDFU and to
optimize the WM treatment and ﬁxation. Plants were grown for
4 days during SVT, and they were treated with 33 μM WM for 1 h
before ﬁxation in 4% formaldehyde in 0.25x KPBS. The germina-
tion rate during SVT was not signiﬁcantly different between
genotypes (Supplementary Fig. 5A), but the hypocotyl length of
WT was longer than that of zig-1 (Supplementary Fig. 5B) as
previously reported24. Fixed seedlings were imaged by confocal
microscopy to visualize the vacuoles in the epidermis and cortex
from the root transition and elongation zones (Supplementary Fig.
5C). Visualization of vacuoles after PFA ﬁxation in KPBS buffer
results in weak GFP ﬂuorescence. As expected, a single vacuole
was observed in most cells of WT roots regardless of chemical
treatment. Multiple vacuoles were detected in zig-1 roots in the
control treatment and the WM treatment resulted in fewer
vacuoles per cell when compared to the control. Most cells did not
complete vacuole fusion after 1 h under these conditions and this
was unexpected26,27. This result could be due to hardware
limitations or suboptimal ﬁxation, and it prompted an increase
in the incubation time of the WM in subsequent experiments.
A ﬁnal EVT was conducted to demonstrate the feasibility of
BRIC-24 before ﬂight. Plants were grown for 3 days and treated
with 33 μM WM for 2 h before ﬁxation in 4% formaldehyde in 0.5x
PBS
to
preserve
GFP
ﬂuorescence
(Fig.
2;
Supplementary
Fig. 5D, E). Again, no signiﬁcant differences in seed germination
were detected between genotypes but zig-1 hypocotyls were
shorter than the WT (Fig. 2a; Supplementary Fig. 5D, E). Root
cortical cells of the root transition zone were imaged for vacuole
morphology (Fig. 2b, c) and most WT cells contained only one
vacuole regardless of treatment. Multiple vacuoles per cell were
observed in the zig-1 control, and WM treatment resulted in a
signiﬁcant reduction in the number of vacuoles per cell in the
mutant. These results suggest that chemical inhibitor treatments
in the BRIC-PDFU are feasible, albeit adjustments must be made to
accommodate changes due to the limitations of the hardware.
Even though the feasibility of BRIC-24 was demonstrated during
EVT, the overall quality of GFP signal, seedling preservation and
WM effectiveness was not on par with similar experiments outside
the BRIC-PDFU hardware. This may result from the lack of
precision when loading solutions into the dual chamber. We then
tested whether deviations from the 1:1 ratio between the WM (or
DMSO) solution in AGM and the ﬁxative could affect the quality of
cell ﬁxation. Dark grown zig-1 seedlings were ﬁxed in different
mixtures of liquid AGM and ﬁxative solution that mimic unequal
loading of each solution into the dual chamber. The best cell
morphology and GFP signal preservation were obtained when
those solutions were mixed with 1:1 ratio. Higher concentrations
of ﬁxative induced cell damage while lower concentrations of
ﬁxative resulted in lower GFP intensity (Supplementary Fig. 6).
These results explain some suboptimal cell preservation and GFP
ﬂuorescence during SVT and EVT (Supplementary Fig. 7) and must
be considered for future ﬂight experiments using the BRIC-PDFU.
Nonetheless, sufﬁcient seedlings with good preservation and
bright GFP ﬂuorescence were recovered from EVT to demonstrate
ﬂight readiness of BRIC-24.
zig-1 showed normal germination but altered hypocotyl
growth on the ISS
BRIC-24 was ﬂown with the SpaceX-22 mission (Fig. 1). Identical
experiments with 4 BRICs containing 22 PDFUs were completed
on the ISS (ﬂight) and at Kennedy Space Center (ground control).
Due to a power failure, the ground control experiment ran
5 weeks after the ﬂight. We analyzed the germination rate,
seedling hypocotyl length of WT and zig-1 from ﬂight assay and
compared the data to ground control. Seed germination was not
affected by the microgravity environment of the ISS in either
genotype (Fig. 3a). Like SVT and EVT experiments, WT hypocotyls
were 7.35% and 31.67% longer than those of zig-1 in ground
control and ﬂight respectively. However, the ISS environment
resulted in 8.46% longer hypocotyls on the WT compared to
ground control while the effect in zig-1 was the opposite, where
zig-1 plants grown on the ISS were 11.57% shorter than the
ground control (Fig. 3b, d). WT roots were 13% longer than zig-1 in
both treatments and no differences were detected between the
ﬂight and ground controls in either genotype (Fig. 3c, d). These
results suggest that seed germination and root growth of zig-1 are
not affected by microgravity, but its hypocotyl growth may be
inhibited by the stresses imposed by the ISS environment.
WM-induced vacuole fusion may be delayed in microgravity
The primary goal for this research was to test whether WM can
induce vacuole fusion of zig-1 in the microgravity environment of
the ISS. For this purpose, all seedlings collected from BRIC-PDFUs
of ﬂight assay and ground control were imaged by confocal
microscopy for vacuole number analysis. Epidermal and cortical
cells within the transition and elongation zones of the root tip
were analyzed as changes in vacuole morphology are readily
observed in these cell transitions44,45. WT cells had only one
vacuole with a few exceptions in the transition zone, regardless of
chemical treatment or ﬂight environment (Fig. 4). This suggests
that the microgravity environment on the ISS does not induce
major delays on vacuole biogenesis in the WT. zig-1 seedlings
showed the typical fragmented vacuole phenotype in both the
ﬂight assay and the ground control when the DMSO control
treatment was applied (Fig. 4). While no differences were
M. Wang et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 
1234567890():,;

observed between ﬂight and ground control in the zig-1 transition
zone of roots treated with DMSO (Fig. 4b, f), a small but signiﬁcant
increase in vacuole number was detected in the elongation zone
of ﬂight samples in zig-1 (Fig. 4d, h). For example, the average
vacuole number per cell was 3.27 for ground control and 3.80 for
ﬂight assay in the epidermis of the elongation zone. Therefore, zig-
1 may have an enhanced zig-1 phenotype in the microgravity
environment of the ISS.
Vacuole numbers in WM-treated plants was used as a proxy for
vacuole fusion events (Fig. 4). As expected, the vacuole number
per cell in zig-1 treated with WM was smaller than the DMSO
control for both ﬂight and ground control samples and in all cells
analyzed. This suggests that the WM treatment was effective at
inducing vacuole fusion inside the PDFU. Like the EVT experiment,
WM did not induce complete vacuole fusion in either ﬂight or
ground control as zig-1 cells containing more than one vacuole
were observed in all tissues. However, a higher number of
vacuoles was observed in the epidermis of WM-treated zig-1
grown on the ISS when compared to the ground (Fig. 4a–d,
Supplementary Table 2). These results suggest a small delay in zig-
1 vacuole fusion during ﬂight. This hypothesis is supported by the
smaller difference in the average vacuole number between DMSO
and WM treatments in the epidermis transition zone for the ﬂight
samples (0.88) when compared to ground control (1.17). Similar
results were found in the epidermis elongation zone, with these
differences being 0.91 (ﬂight) and 1.57 (ground), respectively. This
sensitivity to the ﬂight environment was not detected in the
cortical cells where the difference between WM and DMSO
vacuole numbers were similar in the two environments. These
results overall suggest a cell-type speciﬁc response to the stress
conditions of the ﬂight environment that resulted in small
decreases in vacuole fusion in the epidermis.
Amyloplasts were associated with tonoplast in microgravity
Vacuoles are tightly associated with other organelles and vacuole-
amyloplasts associations might be involved in gravity sensing27.
We took advantage of the strong GFP ﬂuorescence of ﬁxed BRIC-
24 samples and the vacuole phenotype of zig-1 to test whether
microgravity alters the association of vacuoles with amyloplasts.
Statocytes from WT and zig-1 seedlings that were treated with the
DMSO buffer were imaged by confocal microscopy (Fig. 5;
Supplementary Fig. 10). Amyloplasts in hypocotyl endodermal
cells were found closely associated with tonoplast both for ﬂight
sample and ground control and in both genotypes, and the
tonoplast membrane surrounded all plastids (Fig. 5). As expected,
WT amyloplasts were found at the bottom of the cell in the
ground control samples while they were distributed throughout
the cell in the ISS samples. Like previous results27, amyloplasts
appeared trapped between fragmented vacuoles in zig-1 for both
ﬂight and ground control. Unfortunately, we could not analyze
root statocytes in a similar manner due to low GFP ﬂuorescence
intensity in root columella cells (Supplementary Fig. 10). These
results overall suggest that the microgravity environment of the
ISS does not appear to alter the association of vacuoles and
amyloplasts at least in hypocotyls.
Fig. 2
The WM-induced vacuole fusion assay can be carried out in the BRIC-PDFU. a Germination rate of WT and zig-1 seeds inside BRIC-
PDFU during EVT. No signiﬁcant difference in germination rate between two genotypes was detected after removing the two WT outliners
(30% and 50%). (Unpaired t-test, ns: p > 0.05; n represents plate number, n > = 8). b Fixed root tip cortex cell vacuole morphology of WT and
zig-1 (GFP-TIP2;1). Three-day-old WT and zig-1 seedlings were treated with DMSO buffer control or WM solution for 2 h and then seedlings
were ﬁxed and kept at 4 °C before confocal imaging. Scale bar: 20 μm. c Quantiﬁcation of vacuole number in WT and zig-1 after chemical
treatment. Cells from the cortex transition zone of the root tip were analyzed. (Two-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test,
****p < 0.0001; n represents cell number under analysis for each genotype with each treatment, n > 365). Raw datapoints are represented with
ﬁlled circles. Error bars represent standard deviation.
M. Wang et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

DISCUSSION
Here, we investigated the effect of microgravity on plant vacuole
fusion and the association of vacuoles and plastids. The feasibility
of chemical treatments in plants on the ISS was demonstrated
using the BRIC-PDFU hardware and an optimized plant ﬁxation
protocol.
The microgravity environment
of the ISS enhanced
the
phenotype of zig-1. WT seedlings had longer hypocotyls when
grown on the ISS and this was consistent with previous
experiments with seedlings grown in the dark46–48. No differences
in root growth were detected between ground controls and ISS-
grown WT plants and similar results are reported elsewhere for
Arabidopsis seedlings49,50. The increased
elongation
of WT
hypocotyls in microgravity may result from increased cell wall
extensibility and reduced accumulation of xyloglucans46. In
addition, an increase in transverse microtubules may also be
involved in changing the rate of cell elongation48. On the other
hand, zig-1 mutants showed shorter hypocotyls and more
vacuoles per cell in some root cells when grown in microgravity.
This suggests an enhanced zig-1 phenotype on the ISS. Given the
role of VTI11 as a SNARE for protein trafﬁcking51, it is tempting to
speculate that the microgravity environment may have a negative
effect for endomembrane trafﬁcking overall. Moreover, the
enhanced phenotype of zig-1 suggests that microgravity results
in a mild decrease in vacuole fusion even though this can only be
detected in this sensitized genotype. Cell elongation is in part
dependent on the establishment and morphology of the large
central vacuole17, and altered vacuole fusion could contribute to
the reduction in hypocotyl elongation in ﬂight-grown zig-1.
Unfortunately, the low expression of the GFP-TIP2;1 marker in
hypocotyl cells precluded a direct analysis of vacuole numbers in
that tissue. Given the similar growth of zig-1 roots between
ground control and ﬂight, we can not rule out other cellular
defects in the microgravity environment of the ISS for the
shortened hypocotyls in zig-1.
The microgravity environment appears to delay WM-induced
vacuole fusion in zig-1 root epidermis. The WM fusion assay is an
ideal tool for visualization of cellular membrane fusion in ﬁxed
tissues in space. We selected the cortex and epidermis from the
transition and early elongation zones of the root because while
the fragmented vacuole phenotype of zig-1 is present in most cell
types, the WM-induced fusion is best visualized in those root
cells26,27. Moreover, root cells undergoing the transition between
meristem and elongation zones are well-deﬁned stages of vacuole
maturation45,52–54. Overall, we found cells from the transition and
early elongation zone to be better preserved than the central
elongation or the maturation zones. Given the large numbers of
seedlings used, this allowed us to obtain quantitative information
for this assay. The vacuole number analysis in epidermis and
cortex indicated that WM was overall effective at inducing vacuole
Fig. 3
WT and zig-1 in BRIC-PDFU can germinate and grow in microgravity environment as on earth. a Germination rate of WT and zig-1
grown in the BRIC-PDFU from ground control or ﬂight. No differences were detected in the germination rate between genotypes or
treatments. (Two-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ns: p > 0.1234, n represents plate number per genotype per treatment,
n > 10). b Hypocotyl length of WT and zig-1 grown in the BRIC-PDFU from ground control and ﬂight. WT showed longer hypocotyl than zig-1
both for ground control and ﬂight. Flight assay promoted the hypocotyl length of WT while inhibited zig-1’s hypocotyl length. (Two-way
ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ****p < 0.0001, n represents seedling number per genotype per treatment, n > 200). c Root length of
WT and zig-1 grown in the BRIC-PDFU from ground control and ﬂight. The zig-1 mutant showed shorter roots than WT in both ground control
and ﬂight (Two-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ****p < 0.0001, n represents seedling number per genotype per treatment,
n > 160). Raw datapoints are represented with ﬁlled circles. Error bars represent standard deviation. d Representative seedlings of the WT and
zig-1 from either ground control or ﬂight after de-integration of the BRIC-PDFU. Fixed seedlings were taken out of ﬁxative solution and
arranged on plate. Scale bar: 1 cm.
M. Wang et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 

fusion of zig-1 in microgravity inside the BRIC-PDFU. This result
underscores the feasibility of chemical inhibitor treatments in
plants grown on the ISS. These experiments, however, also
exposed limitations rendered by the PDFU hardware as vacuole
fusion was incomplete even in the ground control, unlike similar
experiments outside the hardware where almost all the zig-1 cells
result in having a single vacuole. Given the sealed nature of the
PDFU and the mode of actuation, contact of the chemical solution
with all the seedlings on the plate may be incomplete and this
would be exacerbated by the abnormal movement of liquids
under microgravity. Nonetheless, a small but signiﬁcant delay in
WM-induced vacuole fusion was detected in the epidermis of
ﬂight-grown zig-1. This result, together with the increased vacuole
number
in
this
mutant
under
microgravity,
suggests
that
microgravity may slow down membrane fusion events in plants
but not sufﬁciently to inhibit growth or be detectable in the WT.
This work demonstrated that ﬁxation of ﬂuorescent protein-
labeled organelles on the ISS is feasible. Previous cell biology
experiments on the ISS relied on tissue ﬁxation followed by
electron
microscopy9.
Fluorescence
microscopes
have
been
available at the ISS48,55 which allowed the visualization of GFP
tagged proteins in plants56, but these have been limited to tissue
expression patterns due to the complexity of high-resolution
imaging57. Imaging of plant cells with high resolution requires
high numerical aperture objectives with short working distances
which require specimens be mounted on slides, something that
Fig. 4
Quantiﬁcation of WM-induced vacuole fusion. Vacuole morphology (a, c, e, g) and vacuole number (b, d, f, h) of WT and zig-1 plants
expressing GFP-TIP2;1. Seedlings were grown in ground control or the ISS and treated with DMSO buffer (control) or WM solution. Cells were
imaged at the root tip epidermis transition zone (a, b), epidermis elongation zone (c, d), cortex transition zone (e, f) or cortex elongation zone
(g, h). Four-day-old seedlings were treated with DMSO buffer control or WM solution for 2 h and then seedlings were ﬁxed and kept in 4 °C
before confocal imaging. (Three-way ANOVA, Tukey’s multiple comparison test, ****p < 0.0001; **p < 0.0021; n represents cell number under
analysis per genotype per treatment, n > 155). Raw datapoints are represented with ﬁlled circles. Error bars represent standard deviation. Scale
bar: 40 μm.
M. Wang et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

would require a large amount of astronaut time. Therefore, tissue
ﬁxation and post-ﬂight microscopy is still the best option for cell
biology when large sample numbers are needed. Electron
microscopy of ﬁxed samples provides the best cellular and
subcellular resolution but is time consuming. We set out to
develop
effective
protocols
for
the
ﬁxation
of
Arabidopsis
seedlings carrying ﬂuorescently tagged proteins such that we
could take advantage of the capabilities and efﬁciency of confocal
microscopy. We were able to obtain good quality ﬁxations in both
genotypes that allowed us to quantify vacuoles in sufﬁcient
seedlings, but it is important to emphasize that the ﬁxation quality
was still diminished compared to similar ﬁxation protocols outside
the BRIC-PDFU hardware even on earth.
The ﬁxation protocol described here was optimized to follow a
chemical treatment in AGM buffer. BRIC-PDFU actuations result in
the mixture of ﬁxative and chemical treatment solution as there is
no mechanism to remove the ﬁrst solution. Both the AGM and the
ﬁxative buffer contribute to the osmolarity of the ﬁnal mixture and
therefore affect ﬁxation quality. Membrane vesiculation was
observed in some ﬁxed seedlings (Supplementary Figs. 3, 7), and
further optimization of the ﬁxation protocol may improve the
post-ﬂight imaging of stored ﬁxed samples. Similar vesiculation
phenomena has been reported in formaldehyde-ﬁxed samples in
other systems58. A further challenge of the PDFU hardware that
might impinge on ﬁxation quality is the low precision of the
volumes used to ﬁll the dual chamber of PDFUs. Our study
demonstrated that variations from the 1:1 ratio of AGM to ﬁxative
can dramatically alter the ﬁxation quality of plant specimens.
Future experiments using this hardware must ensure sufﬁcient
sample size to account for the loss of samples due to poor ﬁxation.
An improved dual chamber PDFU unit with more precise volume
control would augment the use of this hardware in future ﬂight
experiments.
Tissue ﬁxation protocols that are compatible with ﬂuorescent
proteins have been developed for plants37,38,42,59. These protocols
were developed to improve imaging depth within plant tissues by
clearing cellular structures. Maintaining subcellular structure and
ﬂuorescent protein structure and intensity allow for imaging
experiments that are incompatible with live-cell imaging such as
those conducted in space. We found that the intensity of GFP and
mCherry is retained in ﬁxed seedlings even after long storage in
the cold. However, GFP intensity was more sensitive than mCherry
to buffer composition. Lower concentration of KPBS buffer
reduces the intensity of GFP, suggesting the GFP stability can be
altered by the concentration of certain salt. Unfortunately, the
morphology of the mCherry-tagged ER was poorly preserved with
most ﬁxative solutions. Many aggregates of ER membranes were
detected while the ﬂuorescence intensity of the mCherry marker
was intact. A similar phenomenon was reported in Drosophila cells
carrying a BiP-Superfolder GFP-HDEL fusion that labels the ER. In
those cells, chemical ﬁxation disrupted the ER morphology and ER
tubules appeared to fragment into discrete puncta60. Preservation
of ER structures by chemical ﬁxation may require speciﬁc chemical
compositions.
METHODS
Arabidopsis materials and growth conditions
Arabidopsis ecotype Columbia (Col-0) expressing GFP-TIP2;1 was
previously described39 and previously transformed27 with the
HDEL-mCherry construct40. The zig-1 mutant was previously
described24, and the GFP-TIP2;1 marker was introgressed into this
genotype by crossing. The HDEL-mCherry marker40 was separately
introduced into zig-1 by Agrobacterium-mediated transformation27
and the two markers were combined by crossing and selection of
plants in the F2.
Seeds were surface sterilized and sown on 0.5 X Arabidopsis
growth medium (AGM, 0.5X Murashige and Skoog medium, 10 g/L
Gelrite, 1% (w/v) sucrose) in 6 cm diameter petri dishes. Each petri
dish contained 30 seeds. Twenty-two Petri dishes were integrated
into PDFUs and stored in 4 BRICs for SVT, EVT and ﬂight. BRICs
were incubated at 4 °C for 5 days in the dark and transferred to
22 °C growth chamber (SVT, EVT and ground control) or the ISS
environment (ﬂight assay) for 3–4 days (Fig. 1).
Chemical treatments and ﬁxation
Three to four-day-old dark-grown seedlings were used for
chemical treatments and ﬁxation. WM (SIGMA, cat# W3144) was
diluted to 33 μM in AGM and an equal volume of DMSO (Thermo
Scientiﬁc, D12345) diluted in AGM was used as the control. For lab
testing, seedlings were incubated in WM working solution or
DMSO buffer control for 1 or 2 h in the dark. If used in the BRIC-
PDFU, WM or DMSO were stored in one of the chambers in the
PDFU and an actuator tool was used to push each solution onto
the petri dish.
Optimization of the seedling ﬁxation protocol involved testing
different buffers for the PFA ﬁxative. To mimic the mixing process
Fig. 5
Visualization of the vacuole and amyloplast inside the hypocotyl endodermal cell. Amyloplasts (where arrows point at) were
associated with tonoplast (labeled by GFP) in hypocotyl endodermis of WT and zig-1 in microgravity environment as on earth. Scale bar:
20 μm.
M. Wang et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 

inside the BRIC-PDFU, one volume of 0.5X AGM was mixed with
one volume of 8% Paraformaldehyde (PFA, Electron Microscopy
Sciences cat# 15700) in the corresponding buffer for a ﬁnal
concentration of 4% PFA. The ﬁnal concentration for each buffer
to test was 0.5X AGM, 0.5X or 0.25X KPBS61, 0.5X or 1X BupHTM PBS
(ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc cat# 28372), 0.5X or 1X microtubule
stabilizing buffer (MTSB)43, 1X Potassium phosphate buffer (PPB)
(6.5 mM KH2PO4, 93.5 mM K2HPO4) and 0.25X Sorenson’s buffer62.
Seedlings treated with each mixture were immediately stored at
4 °C until confocal microscopy.
For SVT, EVT and ﬂight assay, 16% PFA aqueous solutions were
diluted to 8% PFA in 0.5X KPBS (SVT) or 1X BupHTM PBS (EVT, ﬂight
assay). The ﬁnal PFA concentration after actuation in the PDFU
was around 4% with 0.25X KPBS buffer (SVT) and 0.5X BupHTM PBS
buffer (EVT, ﬂight assay). Seedlings were then stored at 4 °C until
de-integration of BRIC-PDFU followed by confocal microscopy.
Microscopy
Fixed seedlings were washed 3 times for 1 min in sterilized water
before imaging. A Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope was used for
all the imaging. The excitation/emission wavelengths for GFP and
mCherry
were
488 nm/490–561 nm
and
561 nm/570–676 nm
respectively. The C-Apochromat 40X/1.2 W Korr FCS M27 water-
immersion objective was used. All seedlings were imaged at the
root tip transition and elongation zones and in both epidermis
and/or cortical cells. The transition zone was deﬁned as the region
of the root apex where a doubling in cell length was observed in a
speciﬁc cell layer, corresponding to the boundary between the
meristematic and elongation zones63 and the cell where that
doubling occurred was included in the analysis. Cells in the
elongation zone were identiﬁed as those past the transition zone.
Two to three z sections were captured per sample in each cell
layer. Cells where the section was too close to the cell cortex were
not included and vacuoles were counted by eye as deﬁned by
ﬂuorescently-labelled membrane boundaries. Some seedlings
were additionally imaged at the root tip columella and hypocotyl
endodermis.
Image analysis
For SVT, EVT and the ﬂight assay, seeds germination rate was
calculated from the number of recovered seedlings in each
PDFU after de-integration. To measure hypocotyl length, ﬁxed
seedlings were arranged on glass slides and imaged using
digital cameras. Hypocotyl and root length was measured with
Fiji64.
To count the number of vacuoles per cell, images from different
tissue and cell type was analyzed separately. Only cells with good
preservation and strong GFP ﬂuorescence intensity were counted.
Three-way ANOVA analysis was applied to compare the cellular
vacuole amount among different treatments. Statistical analysis
and ﬁgure generation were conducted with GraphPad Prism
version 9.2.0 for macOS, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California
USA, www.graphpad.com.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Received: 1 April 2022; Accepted: 23 August 2022;
REFERENCES
1. Ferl, R., Wheeler, R., Levine, H. G. & Paul, A. L. Plants in space. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
5, 258–263 (2002).
2. Link, B., Durst, S., Zhou, W. & Stankovic, B. Seed-to-seed growth of Arabidopsis
thaliana on the International Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 31, 2237–2243
(2003).
3. Shymanovich, T. & Kiss, J. Z. Conducting plant experiments in space and on the
moon. Methods Mol. Biol. 2368, 165–198 (2022).
4. Paul, A. L., Amalﬁtano, C. E. & Ferl, R. J. Plant growth strategies are remodeled by
spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol. 12, 232 (2012).
5. Manzano, A. I. et al. Germination of Arabidopsis seed in space and in simulated
microgravity: Alterations in root cell growth and proliferation. Microgravity Sci.
Technol. 21, 293 (2009).
6. Kordyum, E. L. Plant cell gravisensitivity and adaptation to microgravity. Plant
Biol. (Stuttg.) 16, 79–90 (2014).
7. Jost, A. I., Hoson, T. & Iversen, T. H. The utilization of plant facilities on the
international space station-the composition, growth, and development of plant
cell walls under microgravity conditions. Plants (Basel) 4, 44–62 (2015).
8. Hoson, T. & Soga, K. New aspects of gravity responses in plant cells. Int. Rev. Cytol.
229, 209–244 (2003).
9. Nakashima, J., Liao, F., Sparks, J. A., Tang, Y. & Blancaﬂor, E. B. The actin cytos-
keleton is a suppressor of the endogenous skewing behaviour of Arabidopsis
primary roots in microgravity. Plant Biol. (Stuttg.) 16, 142–150 (2014).
10. Laurinavicius, R., Kenstaviciene, P., Rupainiene, O. & Necitailo, G. In vitro plant cell
growth in microgravity and on clinostat. Adv. Space Res. 14, 87–96 (1994).
11. Kordyum, E. L. Effects of altered gravity on plant cell processes: Results of recent
space and clinostatic experiments. Adv. Space Res 14, 77–85 (1994).
12. Mazars, C. et al. Microgravity induces changes in microsome-associated proteins
of Arabidopsis seedlings grown on board the international space station. PLoS
One 9, e91814 (2014).
13. Mazars, C. et al. Microsome-associated proteome modiﬁcations of Arabidopsis
seedlings grown on board the International Space Station reveal the possible
effect on plants of space stresses other than microgravity. Plant Signal. Behav. 9,
e29637 (2014).
14. Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Xie, J. & Zheng, H. Differential protein expression proﬁling of
Arabidopsis thaliana callus under microgravity on board the Chinese SZ-8
spacecraft. Planta 241, 475–488 (2015).
15. Tomko, D.L. et al. NASA Space Biological Science Plan 2016–2025. https://
www.nasa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/atoms/ﬁles/16-03-23_sb_plan.pdf (2016).
16. Marty, F. Plant vacuoles. Plant Cell 11, 587–599 (1999).
17. Kaiser, S. & Scheuring, D. To lead or to follow: Contribution of the plant vacuole to
cell growth. Front Plant Sci. 11, 553 (2020).
18. Hara-Nishimura, I. & Hatsugai, N. The role of vacuole in plant cell death. Cell Death
Differ. 18, 1298–1304 (2011).
19. Aniento, F., Sánchez de Medina Hernández, V., Dagdas, Y., Rojas-Pierce, M. &
Russinova, E. Molecular mechanisms of endomembrane trafﬁcking in plants.
Plant Cell 34, 146–173 (2021).
20. Ebine, K. et al. A SNARE complex unique to seed plants is required for protein
storage vacuole biogenesis and seed development of Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant
Cell 20, 3006–3021 (2008).
21. Fujiwara, M. et al. Interactomics of Qa-SNARE in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell
Physiol. 55, 781–789 (2014).
22. Ebine, K. et al. A membrane trafﬁcking pathway regulated by the plant-speciﬁc
RAB GTPase ARA6. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 853–859 (2011).
23. Uemura, T. & Ueda, T. Plant vacuolar trafﬁcking driven by RAB and SNARE pro-
teins. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 22, 116–121 (2014).
24. Kato, T. et al. SGR2, a phospholipase-like protein, and ZIG/SGR4, a SNARE, are
involved in the shoot gravitropism of Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 14, 33–46 (2002).
25. Yano, D. et al. A SNARE complex containing SGR3/AtVAM3 and ZIG/VTI11 in
gravity-sensing cells is important for Arabidopsis shoot gravitropism. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 8589–8594 (2003).
26. Zheng, J., Han, S. W., Rodriguez-Welsh, M. F. & Rojas-Pierce, M. Homotypic
vacuole fusion requires VTI11 and is regulated by phosphoinositides. Mol. Plant 7,
1026–1040 (2014).
27. Alvarez, A. A. et al. Wortmannin-induced vacuole fusion enhances amyloplast
dynamics in Arabidopsis zigzag1 hypocotyls. J. Exp. Bot. 67, 6459–6472
(2016).
28. Halstead, T. & Dutcher, F. Experiments on plants grown in space. Status and
prospects. Ann. Bot. 54, 3–18 (1984).
29. Brinckmann, E. ESA hardware for plant research on the International Space Sta-
tion. Adv. Space Res. 36, 1162–1166 (2005).
30. Wells, B., McCray, R. H., Best, M. D. & Levine, H. G. A ﬂight-rated Petri dish
apparatus providing two stage ﬂuid injection for aseptic biological investigations
in space. Report No. 0148–7191, (SAE Technical Paper, 2001).
M. Wang et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

31. Basu, P., Kruse, C. P. S., Luesse, D. R. & Wyatt, S. E. Growth in spaceﬂight hardware
results in alterations to the transcriptome and proteome. Life Sci. Space Res.
(Amst.) 15, 88–96 (2017).
32. Paul, A.-L. et al. Spaceﬂight transcriptomes: Unique responses to a novel envir-
onment. Astrobiology 12, 40–56 (2012).
33. Millar, K. D., Johnson, C. M., Edelmann, R. E. & Kiss, J. Z. An endogenous growth
pattern of roots is revealed in seedlings grown in microgravity. Astrobiology 11,
787–797 (2011).
34. Kern, V. D. et al. Gravitropic moss cells default to spiral growth on the clinostat
and in microgravity during spaceﬂight. Planta 221, 149–157 (2005).
35. Fajardo-Cavazos, P. & Nicholson, W. L. Establishing Standard Protocols for Bac-
terial Culture in Biological Research in Canisters (BRIC) Hardware. Gravitational
Space Res. 4, 58–69 (2016).
36. Lee, K., Choi, S., Yang, C., Wu, H. C. & Yu, J. Autoﬂuorescence generation and
elimination:
a lesson
from
glutaraldehyde.
Chem.
Commun.
(Camb.)
49,
3028–3030 (2013).
37. Kurihara, D., Mizuta, Y., Sato, Y. & Higashiyama, T. ClearSee: a rapid optical
clearing reagent for whole-plant ﬂuorescence imaging. Development 142,
4168–4179 (2015).
38. Kurihara, D., Mizuta, Y., Nagahara, S. & Higashiyama, T. ClearSeeAlpha: Advanced
Optical Clearing for Whole-Plant Imaging. Plant Cell Physiol. 62, 1302–1310
(2021).
39. Cutler, S. R., Ehrhardt, D. W., Grifﬁtts, J. S. & Somerville, C. R. Random GFP::cDNA
fusions enable visualization of subcellular structures in cells of Arabidopsis at a
high frequency. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 3718–3723 (2000).
40. Nelson, B. K., Cai, X. & Nebenfuhr, A. A multicolored set of in vivo organelle
markers for co-localization studies in Arabidopsis and other plants. Plant J. 51,
1126–1136 (2007).
41. Nakashima, J. et al. Delaying seed germination and improving seedling ﬁxation:
lessons learned during science and payload veriﬁcation tests for Advanced Plant
EXperiments (APEX) 02-1 in space. Gravitational Space Res. 2, 54–67 (2014).
42. Ursache, R., Andersen, T. G., Marhavy, P. & Geldner, N. A protocol for combining
ﬂuorescent proteins with histological stains for diverse cell wall components.
Plant J. 93, 399–412 (2018).
43. Pasternak, T. et al. Protocol: An improved and universal procedure for whole-
mount immunolocalization in plants. Plant Methods 11, 50 (2015).
44. Zouhar, J. & Rojo, E. Plant vacuoles: where did they come from and where are
they heading? Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 12, 677–684 (2009).
45. Cui, Y. et al. A whole-cell electron tomography model of vacuole biogenesis in
Arabidopsis root cells. Nat. Plants 5, 95–105 (2019).
46. Soga, K., Wakabayashi, K., Kamisaka, S. & Hoson, T. Stimulation of elongation
growth and xyloglucan breakdown in Arabidopsis hypocotyls under microgravity
conditions in space. Planta 215, 1040–1046 (2002).
47. Hoson, T. et al. Morphogenesis of rice and Arabidopsis seedlings in space. J. Plant
Res. 112, 477–486 (1999).
48. Soga, K. et al. Modiﬁcation of growth anisotropy and cortical microtubule
dynamics in Arabidopsis hypocotyls grown under microgravity conditions in
space. Physiologia Plant. 162, 135–144 (2018).
49. Vandenbrink, J. P. et al. RNA‐seq analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after
exposure to blue‐light phototropic stimuli in microgravity. Am. J. Bot. 106,
1466–1476 (2019).
50. Valbuena, M. A. et al. The combined effects of real or simulated microgravity and
red-light photoactivation on plant root meristematic cells. Planta 248, 691–704
(2018).
51. Uemura, T. et al. Systematic analysis of SNARE molecules in Arabidopsis: dissection of
the post-Golgi network in plant cells. Cell Struct. Funct. 29, 49–65 (2004).
52. Scheuring, D., Schöller, M., Kleine-Vehn, J. & Löfke, C. in Plant cell expansion 83–92
(Springer, 2015).
53. Lofke, C., Dunser, K., Scheuring, D. & Kleine-Vehn, J. Auxin regulates SNARE-
dependent vacuolar morphology restricting cell size. Elife 4, https://doi.org/
10.7554/eLife.05868 (2015).
54. Dünser, K. et al. Extracellular matrix sensing by FERONIA and Leucine‐Rich Repeat
Extensins controls vacuolar expansion during cellular elongation in Arabidopsis
thaliana. EMBO J. 38, e100353 (2019).
55. Chatani, M. et al. Acute transcriptional up-regulation speciﬁc to osteoblasts/
osteoclasts in medaka ﬁsh immediately after exposure to microgravity. Sci. Rep. 6,
39545 (2016).
56. Ferl, R. J. & Paul, A.-L. The effect of spaceﬂight on the gravity-sensing auxin
gradient of roots: GFP reporter gene microscopy on orbit. npj Microgravity 2, 1–9
(2016).
57. Rottenfusser, R. in Methods in Cell Biology Vol. 114 43–67 (Elsevier, 2013).
58. Hagedorn, M., Neuhaus, E. M. & Soldati, T. Optimized ﬁxation and immuno-
ﬂuorescence staining methods for Dictyostelium cells. Methods Mol. Biol. 346,
327–338 (2006).
59. Imoto, A. et al. A ClearSee-Based Clearing Protocol for 3D Visualization of Ara-
bidopsis
thaliana
Embryos.
Plants
(Basel)
10,
https://doi.org/10.3390/
plants10020190 (2021).
60. Summerville, J. B. et al. The effects of ER morphology on synaptic structure and
function in Drosophila melanogaster. J. Cell Sci. 129, 1635–1648 (2016).
61. Peddie, C. J., Liv, N., Hoogenboom, J. P. & Collinson, L. M. Integrated light and
scanning electron microscopy of GFP-expressing cells. Methods Cell Biol. 124,
363–389 (2014).
62. Rizzo, N. W., Duncan, K. E., Bourett, T. M. & Howard, R. J. Backscattered electron
SEM imaging of resin sections from plant specimens: observation of histological
to subcellular structure and CLEM. J. Microsc. 263, 142–147 (2016).
63. Salvi, E., Di Mambro, R. & Sabatini, S. Dissecting mechanisms in root growth from
the transition zone perspective. J. Exp. Bot. 71, 2390–2396 (2020).
64. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: An open-source platform for biological-image analysis.
Nat. Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks to Dr. Ye Zhang from Kennedy Space Center, Gerard Newsham,
Donald Houze, Susan Manning-Roach and Anne Marie Campbell form MEI
Technologies for help with the SVT, EVT, and Flight assays. Special thanks to
astronaut Thomas Pesquet for conducting the BRIC-PDFU actuation during ﬂight. This
work was supported by a grant from the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (80NSSC19K0145 to M.R.P).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.R.P. designed the experiment. M.W., K.D., V.L., and M.R.P. carried out experiments.
M.W. developed the ﬁxation protocol, prepared plant samples, imaged samples, and
analyzed data. M.W. and M.R.P. wrote the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-022-00226-3.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Marcela Rojas-
Pierce.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
license,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
M. Wang et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2022)  38 
