REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Microbial applications for sustainable space exploration
beyond low Earth orbit
Allison P. Koehle1,8, Stephanie L. Brumwell2,8, Emily P. Seto3, Anne M. Lynch4,5 and Camilla Urbaniak
6,7✉
With the construction of the International Space Station, humans have been continuously living and working in space for 22 years.
Microbial studies in space and other extreme environments on Earth have shown the ability for bacteria and fungi to adapt and
change compared to “normal” conditions. Some of these changes, like bioﬁlm formation, can impact astronaut health and
spacecraft integrity in a negative way, while others, such as a propensity for plastic degradation, can promote self-sufﬁciency and
sustainability in space. With the next era of space exploration upon us, which will see crewed missions to the Moon and Mars in the
next 10 years, incorporating microbiology research into planning, decision-making, and mission design will be paramount to
ensuring success of these long-duration missions. These can include astronaut microbiome studies to protect against infections,
immune system dysfunction and bone deterioration, or biological in situ resource utilization (bISRU) studies that incorporate
microbes to act as radiation shields, create electricity and establish robust plant habitats for fresh food and recycling of waste. In
this review, information will be presented on the beneﬁcial use of microbes in bioregenerative life support systems, their
applicability to bISRU, and their capability to be genetically engineered for biotechnological space applications. In addition, we
discuss the negative effect microbes and microbial communities may have on long-duration space travel and provide mitigation
strategies to reduce their impact. Utilizing the beneﬁts of microbes, while understanding their limitations, will help us explore
deeper into space and develop sustainable human habitats on the Moon, Mars and beyond.
npj Microgravity  (2023) 9:47 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-023-00285-0
INTRODUCTION
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has
pledged to return humans to the Moon in the next two years and
land the ﬁrst humans on Mars by 2033. The journey beyond low
Earth orbit (LEO) will expand human civilization, enable future
space settlements, provide scientiﬁc knowledge of the evolution
of our planet and the solar system, and create global partnerships
in the quest for further space exploration1,2. Under the Artemis
plan, a crewed lunar ﬂyby is scheduled for 2024 (Artemis II),
followed by a lunar landing in 2025 (Artemis III)—the ﬁrst since
the end of the Apollo era in 1972, and eventually a sustainable
lunar presence by the end of this decade3. Critical to the success
of the Artemis program will be Gateway, an orbiting platform
where astronauts will live and conduct research, while providing
support for lengthy expeditions on the lunar surface. The Artemis
program will establish a base camp at the lunar south pole that
will serve as a steppingstone for human missions to Mars.
Research and development at the lunar base will act as prototypes
for these future Mars missions, where NASA can establish best
practices for long-term human exploration in these adverse
extraterrestrial environments4.
Unlike the operation of the International Space Station (ISS),
which is regularly resupplied from Earth within hours after launch,
deep space missions will require self-sufﬁciency and sustainability
independent of Earth. This will involve utilization of renewable
resources, recycling of waste, power generation, and a continuous
supply of food, water, and oxygen over a prolonged/indeﬁnite
period. The moon is the shortest distance beyond LEO with a deep
space environment offering unique research opportunities to be
conducted under the Artemis program. The lunar orbiter Gateway
will function similarly to the ISS utilizing a Power and Propulsion
Element that will use solar energy to propel and power the
spacecraft, a Habitation and Logistics Outpost that will serve as
the living quarters and research workspace, and docking ports for
spacecraft such as Orion, that will be the ﬁrst of its kind to
transport astronauts to and from deep space5,6. The ISS and Earth-
orbiting satellites capitalize on solar energy as a renewable
resource for power, however in more distant outposts such as
Mars, other factors like distance from the sun, angle, and weather
(i.e., dust storms) affect the efﬁciency of energy provided by the
solar arrays7. Such was the case with NASA’s Insight mission,
where a recent Martian dust storm led to accumulated dust on the
solar panels preventing adequate sunlight from reaching them,
forcing the lander into battery-conserving “safe mode”8. Similar
dust coverage issues were experienced during Apollo missions
due to electrically charged lunar dust adhering to solar panels on
the lunar lander9,10. Resupply cargo, like those that are frequently
sent to the ISS, is costly, and may not be feasible for long-duration
space missions (it takes ~7 months to get to Mars). Thus, self-
sustainability in food and oxygen production on extraterrestrial
outposts, such as on the Moon and Mars, is crucial11. In addition,
communication delays between Earth and Mars can range from 5
to 20 min depending on the position of the planets12. Lack of
cargo resupply missions and communication delays can be
detrimental to human health-related emergencies making it
imperative for crew members to be self-sufﬁcient in health risk
prevention and treatment. Therefore, solutions to address limited
resources
and
human
health
risks
that
can
be
feasibly
1Department of Plant Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA. 2Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University of
Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. 3Honeybee Robotics, Altadena, CA, USA. 4Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. 5Graduate Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 6ZIN Technologies Inc, Middleburg Heights, OH, USA. 7NASA Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA. 8These authors contributed equally: Allison P. Koehle, Stephanie L. Brumwell. ✉email: camilla.urbaniak@jpl.nasa.gov
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

implemented in deep space must be established prior to the
Artemis and Mars exploration missions. This could be achieved
through the exploitation and engineering of microbes important
to human health13–16, agriculture17, food production18–20, the
ecosystem21–25, and the built environment26,27. Figure 1 provides
an overview of the various roles microbes could play in deep
space exploration.
In this review, we will examine some key considerations for
planning crewed space missions that allow for self-sufﬁciency and
sustainability and speciﬁcally the role that microbes can play in
achieving
these
goals.
We
will
also
discuss
the
possible
detrimental effects of microbes that could derail a mission, such
as biofouling and increased pathogenicity, and suggest mitigation
strategies to help alleviate some of these concerns.
BIOREGENERATIVE LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS AND THE VALUE
OF MICROBIAL INCLUSION
NASA has been sending astronauts to space for the last 60 years,
and with the advent of deep space missions to the Moon and
Mars, astronauts must be self-sufﬁcient to provide atmospheric
conditions and necessities for human life (i.e., puriﬁed water and
nutrient-rich food)28,29. This self-sufﬁciency can be achieved by
implementing bioregenerative life support systems (BLSS). BLSS
generate essential resources for human survival through biological
processes, with four main purposes: higher plant cultivation, water
treatment, solid waste bioconversion, and atmosphere revitaliza-
tion. Microbes play a vital role in these biological processes by
reducing the storage and resupply of materials necessary for a life-
sustaining, regenerative environment.
Research on BLSS dates back to as early as the 1960s, by
researchers worldwide. Examples include NASA’s “BioHome,” a
650 sq ft closed system that utilized a wetland system for
wastewater recycling, and a biological system including plants
and microorganisms for reducing organic contamination from
wastewater29; the Soviet space program’s Biosphere 3 (BIOS-3),
an underground closed system of phytotrons, that consists of a
crew area and an entirely enclosed greenhouse, growing wheat
and vegetables as well as algae cultivators for air revitaliza-
tion30; the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Micro-Ecological Life
Support System Alternative (MELiSSA), which includes ﬁve
compartments where plants and microorganisms purify the
air, produce food, and recycle waste31; and Beighan University’s
Lunar
Permanent
Astrobase
Life-support
Artiﬁcial
Closed
Ecosystem (Palace) 1, comprising three cabins that work
simultaneously to manage atmospheric conditions, produce
crops, breed insects, and recover solid and liquid waste32. In all
these support systems, microbes are an essential component in
the regulation, degradation and circulation of materials and
energy, ultimately enhancing the effectiveness of these life
support systems.
Fig. 1
Summary of microbial impact during long-duration space missions. Space exploration can beneﬁt from the use of microbes in a
variety of applications including incorporation into biological life support systems (BLSS), in situ resource utilization beyond LEO, and
astronaut therapeutics. However, increased pathogenicity and bioﬁlm formation during spaceﬂight could threaten astronaut health and
spacecraft integrity so mitigation strategies will be needed to prevent such hazards. Microbial applications related to health (purple),
renewable resources (green) or both (purple and green) are highlighted. Figure created with BioRender.com.
A.P. Koehle et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

Plant cultivation
Research and development of higher plant cultivation, a method
of growing crops with increased productivity, enhanced nutri-
tional value, higher volume utilization, and shorter production
cycle, are necessary for the development of sustainable ecosys-
tems in space. Higher plant cultivation modules within BLSS not
only provide a means for food production but also the recycling
and revitalization of air through photosynthesis, and water
recycling
through
transpiration
and
waste
management33.
Because of their importance, plant modules, and the effects of
extraterrestrial conditions on plant growth have been extensively
studied34–36. For example, NASA is heavily involved in this area of
research with its Advanced Plant Habitat (APH) and Vegetable
Production System (Veggie) experiments on the ISS. Both APH and
Veggie are automated growth chambers used by researchers to
determine the effects of microgravity on plant gene expression,
protein, and metabolite levels, as well as their nutritional value37.
The Veggie system has successfully grown lettuce, Chinese
cabbage, mizuna mustard, red Russian kale, and zinnia ﬂowers
on the ISS37 and has enhanced our understanding of plant-
microbe-environment interactions in microgravity38. Using the
Veggie system, Hummerick et al. characterized microorganisms
found on the leaves of three leafy greens: red romaine lettuce,
mizuna mustard, and green leaf lettuce, as well as the microbial
communities associated with the rhizosphere in the pillow
component39. Characterization revealed higher microbial diversity
near roots and within root substrate compared to leaves,
consistent with plants grown in terrestrial soils. Molecular and
culture-based methods revealed that the crops were pathogen-
free and safe for human consumption. The information gained
from the APH and Veggie experiments, especially as it pertains to
plant-microbe interactions, provide a foundation for future
research on higher plant cultivation in microgravity and the
expansion of these ideas for plant production on extraterrestrial
outposts.
One issue with hydroponic growth systems on Earth is microbial
contamination, most often by Fusarium oxysporum40. Certain
abiotic conditions such as high humidity, high temperature, and
reduced airﬂow can cause undesirably high levels of microbial
growth41,42. Veggie is a hydroponic system that has also
succumbed to these limitations. Zinnia hybrida, an annual ﬂower-
ing plant, grown in the Veggie system on the ISS, developed foliar,
stem, and root rot disease, due to high water stress and low
airﬂow43. Whole genome sequencing analysis of the diseased
tissue44 and subsequent virulence assays43, identiﬁed the culprit
as F. oxysporum. This illustrates the potential difﬁculties of growing
crops in hydroponic systems, on Earth or in space.
An alternative to a hydroponic system is a soil-based one where
Martian and lunar regolith can be used as an alternative to
terrestrial soil. This in situ resource utilization (ISRU) of regolith
would reduce the need for costly resupply missions of terrestrial
soil. While many plants and crops have been successfully grown in
simulated Martian and lunar regolith their characteristics do differ
from what would be expected with terrestrial soil45–49. One
limiting factor of regolith is the absence of reactive nitrogen, an
essential nutrient for optimal plant growth and function50–54.
However, the introduction of nitrogen-ﬁxing and nitrogen-cycling
bacterial
species
into
regolith
to
bind
nitrogen
from
the
atmosphere and transform it into reactive nitrogen (in the form
of NO3−and NH4+) could be used as a method to improve
regolith soil fertility55.
Increased Martian soil fertility through symbiotic relationships
has been examined with clover (Melilotus ofﬁcinalis), grown in
simulated regolith that had been inoculated with the nitrogen-
ﬁxing bacterium, Sinorhizobium meliloti56. This study found that
after three months, inoculated treatments produced greater clover
biomass compared to uninoculated treatments, 0.29 g and 0.01 g,
respectively. However, when S. meliloti inoculated clover was
grown in common terrestrial potting mix the total clover biomass
was seven-fold greater than when grown in simulated regolith56.
While plant-bacterial symbiosis could improve soil fertility and
plant growth in Martian regolith, additional experiments are
required to achieve terrestrial levels of plant biomass.
Other plant stressors, such as limited nutrients, may prevent
plants from reaching optimal biomass56. Essential nutrients, such
as potassium, calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, nickel, and
zinc, are present in extraterrestrial soils but not at sufﬁcient levels
for plant uptake. Zaets et al. showed that bacteria can increase the
bioavailability of these minerals in simulated regolith using
inoculants of Pseudomonas sp. IMBG163, Pseudomonas aureofa-
ciens IMBG164, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia IMBG147, Paeniba-
cillus sp. IMBG156, Klebsiella oxytoca IMBG26, and Pantoea
agglomerans
IMV45.
When
inoculated
with
these
bacteria,
increased bioavailability of essential nutrients in the soil and plant
tissue of Tagetes patula (i.e., French marigold) led to increased
plant growth, seed germination and survival45. Conversely, only
20–30% of plants grown in non-inoculated soils achieved seed
germination45. In addition to increasing nutrient bioavailability,
these bacteria were also able to reduce toxic levels of zinc,
chromium, nickel, iron, calcium, and sodium, by up to 50%, within
plant tissue45. By increasing nutrient availability and reducing
toxic accumulation of ions within the soil, microorganisms can be
used as a tool for conditioning Martian and lunar basalt for
effective plant growth and plant nutrient uptake.
Water is another crucial plant resource limited on both the
Moon and Mars. Previous discoveries have found evidence of
liquid water ﬂows on Mars, coming from giant ice slabs beneath
the surface57, though extracting and recycling water from these
ice slabs is energetically impractical. In addition, Martian soil has
limited water-holding capacity due to low organic carbon content,
however, this can be improved by using bacteria that produce
polysaccharides or adhesive proteins that bind soil particles,
thereby increasing the moisture content of soil58. This microbe-soil
interaction can be exploited on Martian outposts to reduce the
need for copious amounts of water, increase soil stability, and
prevent soil desiccation. Several studies on agricultural soils show
that the application of microalgae and cyanobacteria to the soil
can improve soil fertility and health59–61. Nascimento et al.
assessed the ability of the N-ﬁxing cyanobacteria Nostoc sp. to
act as an organic fertilizer and soil conditioner under normal and
drought conditions60. Researchers applied Nostoc sp. and urea as
liquid fertilizers to soil growing wheat (Triticum aestivum), corn
(Zea mays), and common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris). Drought
conditions were simulated by watering the plant to water holding
capacity and drying the soil for 14–16 days. Under drought
conditions, plants fertilized with Nostoc sp. reached a biomass
150% greater than plants continuously watered to water holding
capacity; while plants fertilized only with urea attained only 70%
of the biomass compared to those continuously held at water
holding capacity. Researchers also found that untreated soils
exhibited more leaf wilting from water stress compared to those
plants grown in soil treated with Nostoc sp60. This research shows
the promise that cyanobacteria can have for improving soil quality
for plant growth beyond LEO.
While Martian and lunar regolith are promising soil sources,
they contain heavy metals, such as lead, cadmium, chromium, and
arsenic, that can negatively impact plant growth and soil microbial
ﬁtness62,63. Microbes can be used for bioremediation to convert
Martian and lunar regolith into soil capable of plant growth64–66.
Huang et al. tested the ability of E. coli and B. subtilis to remove
lead, cadmium, and chromium by cultivating samples in solutions
containing varying heavy metal concentrations and environmen-
tal conditions, including pH, temperature, and equilibration time.
Researchers found that both microbes successfully removed heavy
metals under all conditions, though under optimal conditions, E.
A.P. Koehle et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

coli removed 60–69% of cadmium, lead, and chromium while B.
subtilis removed 54–70% of cadmium, lead, and chromium67.
Plant-microorganism
interactions
can
also
be
a
source
of
bioremediation by using plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
that can simultaneously remove toxic heavy metals and improve
crop growth and yield68. Henao and Ghneim-Herrera investigated
this bioremediation method by summarizing results from over 85
research articles and found that Acinetobacter, Agrobacterium,
Arthrobacter,
Bacillus,
Enterobacter,
Klebsiella,
Mesorhizobium,
Microbacterium, Pseudomonas, Rhizobium, Rhodococcus, and Var-
iovorax all exhibited resistance to heavy metals and a high
potential for bioremediation. Speciﬁcally, Klebsiella and Entero-
bacter exhibited the highest tolerance to heavy metals in soil and
the greatest potential to mitigate plant growth inhibition under
high arsenic, cadmium, and lead concentrations68. These results
are mirrored by Yetunde Mutiat et al. 69, who assessed the removal
efﬁciency of heavy metals under varying pH levels by wild-type
and mutant strains of Klebisella varicola. Isolated Klebisella strains
were exposed to various concentrations of lead, cadmium, arsenic,
and nickel, resulting in removal of cadmium under all conditions
with a maximum removal efﬁciency of 97.9 and 99.4% at optimal
conditions of pH 7 for both wild-type and mutant strains.
Microbes can also be used to remove toxins from Martian soil
such as perchlorates, which are found in high levels in Martian soil
and cause a signiﬁcant reduction in plant survival and productiv-
ity70,71. Engineered CO2-utilizing bacteria expressing perchlorate
reduction
enzymes
have
been
shown
to
remove
harmful
perchlorates from the soil while also adding essential nutrients
into the soil, such as chloride ions, oxygen, and water for better
plant growth72–74. Sunikumar et al. tested the ability of two
perchlorate-reducing soil bacteria, Pseudomonas stutzeri and
Azospirillum brasilense, to reduce perchlorates from simulated
regolith and found that they removed up to 5 mM and 10 mM of
perchlorates, respectively, which corresponded to a removal
efﬁciency of 100%75. These results suggest that naturally occurring
or genetically engineered microbes with high perchlorate and/or
toxin-reducing efﬁciency should be further studied for bioreme-
diation of perchlorate and other harmful toxins from Martian and
lunar soils.
Just as microorganisms are a vital part of terrestrial plant
production systems, microorganisms will play an important role in
higher plant production and soil systems on future deep space
missions and extraterrestrial outposts. Previous research indicates
that plant production using hydroponic systems is a promising
method for plant production in microgravity34–36, but further
optimization will be required to prevent fungal contamination in
these systems43. Using soil-based plant growth systems is a
promising alternative to circumvent the limitations of hydro-
ponics, but research is limited in this area within BLSS. Therefore,
further research using soil-based plant growth systems, supple-
mented with microorganisms, may improve the effectiveness of
BLSS and self-sufﬁciency of astronauts on deep space missions.
Wastewater treatment
Water is the largest product consumed in bioregenerative
systems, expending nearly 20 L per person per day76. Extensive
water consumption results in large wastewater production,
including urine and ﬂush water, atmospheric condensate, sink,
shower, laundry, and dish water. Microbes play a vital role in the
recycling of wastewater and nutrients through recycling systems
containing combinations of anaerobic digestion, distillation, and
disinfectant units.
Microbes also play a crucial role in solid waste processing
(including bodily waste), inedible plant material, and other solid
decomposable substances within bioregenerative systems. Drying
is the ﬁrst step to recycling solid waste30,32,77. This step allows the
extraction of water from solid waste, the retention of organic
matter, and the removal of inorganic material78. Dried, solid waste
is then fermented in a solid waste bioreactor containing microbes
that degrade plant waste32,79,80. This method has shown solid
waste degradation rates between 41% and 87.7%79. The degraded
solid waste can either be taken out of the system or applied to a
plant system, providing a carbon and nitrogen-rich source of
residue fertilizer or soil-like substance that increases soil fertility
and overall plant health and productivity81–83.
There are many proposed systems for microbe-assisted waste
puriﬁcation and recycling on spacecraft. The MELiSSA initiative
proposed a loop of compartments that thoroughly recycle gas,
liquid, and solid waste using microorganisms, where each output
of the preceding compartment provides the input for the
following compartment84. Compartment I is an anaerobic digester
that utilizes thermophilic bacteria to break down inedible plant
parts and solid and liquid waste. Clostridium thermocellum
ferments cellulosic substrate, while Clostridium thermosaccharoly-
ticum degrades starches and pectins, leaving volatile fatty acids,
minerals and NH4+ as an output. In compartment II, photoheter-
otrophic bacteria, such as Rhodospirillum rubrum, metabolize
volatile fatty acids. The remaining minerals and NH4+ enter
compartment III where nitrifying bacteria, such as those in the
species Nitrobacter or Nitrosomonas, nitrify NH4+ to NO3−, which
can be utilized in the plant compartment as a fertilizer84. Overall,
this system results in a nitrogen-rich output that can be utilized as
fertilizer in the plant compartment for improved production.
Another system proposed by Tang et al. utilizes a two-system
recycling unit for either domestic water or wastewater79. Domestic
water is puriﬁed by ﬁrst running it through a two-stage membrane
bioreactor and then passing it through a nanoﬁltration system, to
produce hygiene water. The second system utilizes anaerobic,
mostly Bacteroidetes, and aerobic, mostly Proteobacteria, micro-
bial bioreactors to recover organic matter and N from waste-
water79. Within this system, microorganisms are also utilized to
degrade solid waste as part of the microbial fermentation facility
or Bio-toilet. The facility includes a source separation module that
separates urine from feces, a primary bioreactor where feces are
combined with other inedible plant material to be degraded by
microorganisms, and a secondary bioreactor for further degrada-
tion by microbes. This system was tested during 108-day
experiment housing four crew members at the China Astronaut
Research and Training Center. Researchers achieved 100% water
regeneration with 87.7% recycled solid waste79,80.
Although BLSS can obtain 100% water recovery, nitrogen
recovery efﬁciency is still lacking. One option to improve nitrogen
recovery is to utilize urease-producing microorganisms to hydro-
lyze urea, a compound found in human urine at high levels (>13 g/
L)85,86. Urease-producing microorganisms, such as Bacillus, Spor-
osarcina, Pseudomonas, and Paracoccus, used in conjunction with
membrane-biological activated carbon reactor systems by Xie
et al. showed that BLSS can obtain water recovery of 100% with N
recovery of up to 79.33%, which are comparable to efﬁciencies
obtained by Tang et al.79. Another urine-fueled system for waste
recycling, proposed by Maggi et al., includes a soil-based BLSS
aimed at recycling liquid wastes using a plant-microbe system87.
The growth chambers for dwarf wheat and soybean contain three
systems for water and urine injection, atmospheric circulation, and
ventilation. Once injected into the soil, a number of bacteria can
release nitrogen-based intermediates, such as NH4+ and NO3−
from organic nitrogen compounds for plants to uptake. Results
indicated that urine decomposition met the nutrient demands of
the plants as evidenced by successful growth of the dwarf wheat
and soybean plants with comparable biomass generation to those
grown on Earth.
Plant-microbe systems can provide other methods of waste-
water recycling. Plants are excellent water puriﬁers and can
release 2–10 L of water vapor from their leaves through the
process of transpiration88. Plants uptake water through their roots,
A.P. Koehle et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

absorb nutrients into plant tissue, and transpire water through
their stomata. Applying wastewater as a means of watering plants
would effectively turn wastewater into clean water through this
natural process. However, before plants can be exposed to
wastewater, it would need to be pre-treated to reduce organic
loading in soil and remove phytotoxic or other detrimental
compounds that would affect plant growth and metabolism89,90.
This can be achieved with microbial bioreactors through the
mechanisms described above, allowing for eco-friendly water
reclamation.
Atmosphere revitalization
It is projected that crew members on a lunar mission will inhale
about 1 kg of O2 per day and exhale approximately 1.3 kg of
CO291. Production of O2 and removal of CO2 during space missions
could be achieved through photosynthesis, the process by which
plants, algae and cyanobacteria convert CO2, sunlight, and water,
into O2 and energy92. Cyanobacteria are the earliest oxygenic
photosynthetic organisms on Earth and have been contributing to
Earth’s atmospheric oxygen for the last 2.5 billion years93,94. One
advantage of using cyanobacteria over plants for air revitalization
is their ability to perform photosynthesis with far less sunlight
than is required for plant growth. Under normal conditions, plants
and cyanobacteria use chlorophyll-a to convert visible (i.e. “white”)
light into energy, but some cyanobacteria can perform far-red
photosynthesis, using chlorophyll-f, a spectrally red-shifted variant
of chlorophyll-a which absorbs longer wavelengths of light95–97.
This allows those cyanobacteria to also perform photosynthesis
and harvest energy when grown in low- or ﬁltered- light
environments95–97. This photosynthetic efﬁciency, coupled with
the ability to survive the harsh conditions of space98–101 make
cyanobacteria ideal components in BLSS destined for the Moon
and Mars.
Photobioreactors can be incorporated into BLSS to increase the
production of oxygen by cyanobacteria or algae for enhanced air
revitalization. ESA’s MELiSSA project is a BLSS concept focused on
the
regeneration
of
atmospheric
gases
and
water,
waste
treatment, and food production for crewed space missions102,103.
The system comprises the listed compartments, each with a
speciﬁc organism contributing to the recycling pathway104. One of
the ﬁve compartments includes a gas-lift photobioreactor contain-
ing photosynthetic cyanobacteria, speciﬁcally Spirulina platensis,
that uses the CO2 produced by its predecessor compartment to
produce oxygen84. S. platensis was chosen for its light energy
conversion efﬁciency, its ability to tolerate ﬂuctuations in pH, and
its high nutritional value (containing 55–70% protein, 15–25%
carbohydrates, 18% essential fatty acids in addition to vitamins,
minerals, and pigments105). Another species of cyanobacteria that
is being considered for air revitalization, nitrate removal and
edible biomass production in MELiSSA is Limnospira indica. In a
recent 35-day ground study, L. indica was grown in a simpliﬁed
closed-loop version of MELiSSA and the effect of urea, ammonium
(the prominent nitrogen forms present in non-nitriﬁed urine) and
nitrate, on the oxygen production capacity of L. indica, was
measured106. It was observed that cyanobacteria fed nitrate or
urea could effectively reach the desired (set point) O2 level of
20.3%
and
maintain
ambient
O2
levels,
while
those
fed
ammonium could only reach a maximum O2 level of 19.5%106.
This
study
provided
preliminary
evidence
for
the
use
of
ammonium-rich and urea-rich media (such as urine), for L. indica
cultivation and air revitalization. L. indica has also been grown in
photobioreactors on the ISS, as part of the Arthrospira-B space-
ﬂight experiment, and no inhibitory effect on oxygen production
and growth was observed, as compared to ground controls107.
These studies show the promise of cyanobacteria-based BLSS
and/or photobioreactors destined for the Moon and Mars to
provide clean air for crew in spacecraft or in lunar/Mars habitats.
Additional research is needed for optimization such as identifying
additional candidate species, growing combinations of different
cyanobacteria for synergistic effects, and testing more growth
conditions to achieve enhanced biomass and increased efﬁciency.
BIOLOGICAL IN SITU RESOURCE UTILIZATION FOR
SUSTAINABILITY
In addition to BLSS which can increase self-sufﬁciency and
sustainability beyond LEO, the ability to utilize in situ resources,
will also play a role in long-term human habitats on the Moon and
Mars. For instance, electricity and power can be generated with
microbial fuel cells (MFC) coupled with in situ organic material,
and biomining can be used to extract resources for construction,
repair,
and
maintenance
of
structural
components
and
equipment.
Microbial fuel cells
Microbial production of energy has gained much interest in the
last decade. To keep pace with human energy consumption, many
scientists have turned towards the use of microbial fuel cells as a
sustainable method of energy production on Earth108. These
alternative methods of energy production could also be applied
for space exploration as a sustainable method to power the
spacecraft, mission controls, and various life support systems.
MFC are small, lightweight devices that convert organic matter
from renewable sources into electricity using microorganisms as
catalysts109 (Fig. 2). Microorganisms involved in this electroche-
mical activity are called exoelectrogens because of their ability to
transfer electrons exogenously to electron acceptors109. Some
examples of exoelectrogens include Pseudomonas110, Shewa-
nella111, Geobacter112, and Desulfuromonas113.
The idea behind MFC has been around for over a century, but it
is just within the past few decades that it has become a
commercialized product. MFC can produce an energy output up
to 5.61 W/m2114–116, and can also be used for wastewater
recycling, toxin removal, bioremediation, and resource recov-
ery117–121. These same concepts can be utilized on future Martian
or lunar extraterrestrial outposts for energy production and within
BLSS. In 2007, de Vet and Rutgers were the ﬁrst to test the
capabilities of MFC energy production under simulated and real
microgravity conditions aboard the ISS using Rhodoferax ferrir-
educens to produce electricity. Energy output averaged 0.1 mA in
1 G, 0.35 mA in simulated microgravity, and 0.02 mA on the ISS.
While the differences were not statistically signiﬁcant, the study
did show the potential for MFC to operate in space122. This
mechanism for energy production is not yet practical for space
travel due to the low energy output, considering a standard 40 W
light bulb draws 0.36 A to operate, but can be initially utilized for
its byproducts, such as clean wastewater123.
Waste recycling as an energy source.
Waste can accumulate
during space travel in the form of urine, fecal matter, and inedible
food and with the help of microbes, this waste can be repurposed
for energy production as well as for nutrient recovery and
production of potable water. Urine is an excellent feedstock for
MFC as it contains high levels of urea, organic ammonium salts,
and other organic compounds that microbes can convert into
electricity86 thus making urine MFC effective mechanisms for
energy production124–127. Some urine MFC can not only produce
energy but recover nutrients as well. Lu et al. designed a three-
chamber MFC to remove organic pollutants, recover N, phos-
phorus (P), and sulfur (S), and produce energy from urine125. The
maximum power output was 1300 mW/m2, with almost complete
removal of pollutants, including over 97% of urea, total nitrogen,
sulfate, phosphate, and chemical oxygen demand, as well as 40%
of ammonium, 15% of salts, and 91-99% of organic compounds.
A.P. Koehle et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

The MFC also recovered essential nutrients, including 42% of total
N, 37% of phosphate, 59% of sulfate and 33% of total salts125. This
recovery technology can be especially valuable within other
compartments of BLSS, including plant compartments, by provid-
ing nutrient-rich water free of contaminants.
In order for urine MFC to also be used as a mechanism to
convert urine to potable water, the high level of inorganic salts
present in urine (~14.2 g/L)86 need to ﬁrst be removed for MFC to
function efﬁciently125. This can be achieved with an alternative
type of MFC, called a microbial desalination cell, which follows the
same concept as a standard MFC but with an added desalination
chamber between the anode and cathode128. Cao et al. tested this
mechanism of water desalination at concentrations comparable to
the salinity of urine at 5, 20, and 35 g/L using a mixed bacterial
culture, with the salt concentration determined by a change in
conductivity of the solution128. This microbial desalination cell
produced a maximum power output of 2 W/m2, with ~88–94% of
salt removed, depending on the initial concentration128.
Other organic components of wastewater, such as human feces,
can be a resource for electricity generation by MFC as well.
Fangzhou et al. tested the capabilities of MFC to generate
electricity
from
activated
sludge
obtained
from
a
sewage
treatment plant for speciﬁc use within BLSS for future crewed
outposts129. Tests were performed using a standard or adjustable
two-chamber MFC, a one-chamber MFC with one or two
membrane
electrode
assemblies,
and
a
fermentation
pre-
treatment device. The highest maximum power output was
70.8 mW/m2 produced by the two-chamber MFC, however, the
authors concluded that for space applications, the one-chamber
conﬁguration was better, as it produced a more stable output, at
0.3 V129. The efﬁciency of pollutant removal was also tested, with
about 44% removal of ammonium and 71% of organic material
with each conﬁguration129. To further increase power generation
and toxin removal from fecal wastewater, fermentation pre-
treatment was proposed. This involved using reactors ﬁlled with
anaerobic sludge to degrade fecal macromolecules into smaller
organic molecules129. Pre-treating fecal wastewater by fermenta-
tion produced 47% more power than no pre-treatment, suggest-
ing a preference of exoelectrogens within MFC for smaller organic
molecules129. Based on these results, the authors developed an
automatic human feces wastewater MFC system containing a
fermentation pre-treatment device to simultaneously dispose of
one day’s worth of feces and generate electricity. Indeed, the
maximum power output of the system was 240 mW/m2, about 3.5-
fold higher than the standard two-chamber MFC system129.
Inedible food waste will be an inevitable part of spaceﬂight and
extraterrestrial outposts on the Moon and Mars that need to be
disposed of, as on Earth. This organic material can act as substrates
in MFC for energy production, Colombo et al. tested the energy
producing capabilities of MFC with various food-industry organic
wastes as inputs, including those rich in ﬁbers, sugars, proteins,
and acid130. A one-chamber MFC was fed each type of organic
substrate, and the concentration of organic compounds was
measured periodically to obtain the rate of degradation. The
maximum power output for each organic waste substrate was
50 mV for sugar, 40 mV for ﬁber, 30 mV for protein, and 10 mV for
acid, with each organic compound degraded by 90%130.
While MFC will be a useful tool to create energy and recycle
organic waste beyond LEO, research and development is still
ongoing to develop more efﬁcient systems with a larger and
sustained power output. Some of these ideas involve the use of
different materials (such as ceramics) and conﬁgurations (large vs
small, stacked vs dispersed)131. Gajda et al. tested a small (70 mm
long, 15 mm diameter, 2 mm thickness) and a large (100 mm long,
42 mm diameter, 3 mm thickness) terracotta MFC. They found that
the smaller terracotta MFC achieved a power density output 2.9-
fold greater than the large MFC, at 20.4 W/m3 and 7.0 W/m3,
respectively. Gajda et al. also tested the performance of stacking
MFC for a small-scale multi-unit system that could be utilized on
future crewed outposts132. They compared power output of a small
module containing 28 MFC units and a larger module containing
560 MFC units. Stacked 560 units created a ﬁve-fold improvement
in power output of 245 mW compared to the 28 MFC unit. Another
concept is the PeePower urinals which collect urine and feces
directly from the source, producing energy through multiple
ceramic MFC133. This leads to concentrated wastewater inputted
into the MFC rather than diluted samples, which reduces power
output. Researchers tested a 288-unit MFC on a university campus
which averaged 5–10 users per day. The PeePower urinals were
able to produce an average of 75 mW which powered the LED
lights directly connected to the MFC stack for 75 h. Another 432-
unit MFC was tested during a large music festival which averaged
1000 users per day. In this setting, the PeePower urinals were able
to produce an average of 300 mW which successfully powered
lighting within the urinals over a seven-day period133. While the
success of PeePower was demonstrated on Earth, it will be
important to test similar models of power generation using urine
and feces in microgravity. None the less, this research provides the
foundation for the development of similar toilet-like MFC to be
used for power generation on deep space missions.
Plant MFC.
Plant compartments within BLSS can be used for
energy production in MFC as well. Healthy soils contain organic
matter from decaying plant litter as well as carbohydrate ﬂux
Anode
Cathode
Organic
Matter
Organic 
Matter
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
H+
e-
CO2
CO2
H+
H+
H+
H+
H2O
O2
Organic 
Matter
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
e-
CO2
H+
H+
H+
H2O
O2
Exoelectrogens
e-
e-
Fig. 2
Microbial fuel cell. MFC consists of two chambers, separated
by
a
proton
exchange
membrane.
In
the
anode
chamber,
exoelectrogens, shown as a bioﬁlm in this ﬁgure, anaerobically
oxidize organic matter releasing protons and electrons. A closer look
at this interaction can be seen in the bottom image. The electrons
released during the oxidation of organic matter transfer to the
anode and travel to the cathode in the second chamber via an
external circuit, creating an electrical current. The protons released
travel through the proton exchange membrane into the cathode
chamber, where the protons and electrons react with oxygen and
form water.
A.P. Koehle et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

directed out of the roots into the rhizosphere134. In theory, the
anode chamber of a MFC could be positioned within the
rhizosphere to capitalize on the symbiotic microbes present to
oxidize this continuous source of organic matter to generate an
electrical current. Such a soil MFC was tested using rice plants,
where 330 W/ha of power was produced in the presence of
actively growing plants, a seven-fold higher energy output
compared to the energy output of soil MFC not using plants135.
This technology is not limited to only soil-based systems but can
be applied to hydroponic plant systems as well, in which the
anode is situated within the water chamber surrounding plant
roots136. Research by Lee and Miller, growing Bacopa monnieri and
with the addition of Escherichia coli, obtained a power density
output of up to 1.9 W/m2 with a 34% increase in plant growth
fueled by plant essential nutrients supplied by E. coli acting within
the fuel cell136. In addition to electricity generation, soil MFC can
be used for the remediation of heavy metal contaminated
regolith64. Habibul et al. tested the ability of soil MFC to remove
chromium from soil using ryegrass. The soil MFC was fed a
solution of varying concentrations of chromium, resulting in >90%
removal efﬁciency by Proteobacteria and Firmicutes. In addition,
the higher the concentration of chromium, the higher the current
density output, reaching a maximum of 55 mA/m2137. These
results show the promise of energy generation through plant-
system powered MFC with the added beneﬁt of increasing plant
yield for consumption by crewmembers.
Solar power.
Photosynthetic microorganisms, such as algae or
cyanobacteria, can be utilized to convert light energy into
electrical energy, termed microbial electrochemical technology72.
Biophotovoltaics is a speciﬁc type of electrochemical technology
in which phototrophic microorganisms produce electricity by
utilizing incoming light energy to split water molecules, generat-
ing electrons and protons that can be used to produce an
electrical current within an MFC. Several cyanobacteria species
have been tested for use in biophotovoltaics, such as Synecho-
cystis138,139, Nostoc140,141, Lyngbya142,143, and Leptolyngbia144,145.
Kaushik et al. tested the energy producing capabilities of
Synechococcus using a two-chamber photosynthetic MFC built
with light transparent glass146. The MFC operated through a 12-h
light/12-h dark cycle under a white light intensity of 15 W/m2.
Maximum power density output of the photosynthetic MFC was
0.61 W/m2146. This technology provides a feasible method of
energy
production
on
extraterrestrial
outposts,
but
further
research needs to be completed to increase power output and
optimize light conversion.
Research on the use of in situ resources such as wastewater,
plant systems, and solar radiation, shows potential for the use of
MFC as a mode of power generation and sustainability on
extraterrestrial outposts. Though power generation is limited from
these substrates at the moment future work may enhance their
efﬁciency. In addition, other sources of power, such as nuclear
power, could supplement these MFC systems to provide adequate
power generation in habitats and spacecraft beyond LEO147.
Biomining
Biomining is an environmentally friendly and affordable alter-
native to traditional physical-chemical mineral processing meth-
ods to extract metals of economic interest from rock ores or mine
waste. The process involves speciﬁc microorganisms that secrete
organic acids and metal-binding compounds that essentially
dissolve these metals, allowing them to be easily extracted from
the environment148. Biomining is commonly applied to pyritic ores
and completed by iron-oxidizing bacteria, such as Thiobacillus
ferrooxidans149, Leptospirillum ferrooxidans150, and Acidimicrobium
ferrooxidans151. With the reduced iron in the form of pyrite, the
bacteria produce iron that oxidizes metal sulﬁdes to sulfuric acid
which further accelerates rock dissolution152–154. These species,
along with those in the Sulfobacillus and Acidianus genera, as well
as many iron-oxidizing bacteria, are used for the biomining of
copper, zinc, uranium, nickel, aluminum, and cobalt155.
The biomining process is not limited to Earth. It may serve as an
innovative method for reducing the cost of raw materials and
energy requirements beyond LEO, enhancing the sustainability of
life on extraterrestrial outposts. Martian and lunar basalt are
known to contain many valuable metals, such as iron, nickel,
copper, vanadium, and many others, that are suitable substrates
that can be biomined by microbes156,157. Biomining of these
metals from Martian and lunar surfaces could provide the
necessary materials for the in-situ construction of buildings,
electrical systems, spacecraft equipment, solar cells, and heating
and lighting systems in human habitats beyond LEO158.
Recent research on the ISS simulating biomining of essential
compounds from basalt under microgravity demonstrated the
possibility for microbial mining beyond Earth159–161. Cockell et al.
tested the rare Earth element (REE) biomining capabilities of three
microorganisms, Sphingomonas desiccabilis, Bacillus subtilis, and
Cupriavidus metallidurans, under three different levels of gravity:
microgravity, simulated Martian gravity, and terrestrial gravity, and
against a non-biological control160. Biomining reactions took place
within biomining reactors. Within each reactor, researchers placed
growth media, sterilized basalt slides with a known REE and single
strain cultures of each microorganism. Biomining capabilities were
assessed based on absolute quantities of REE in ng obtained from
6 mL bulk ﬂuid collected from the biomining reactors and
compared to the non-biological control, consisting of a sterile
basalt slide without cell inoculation160. REEs assessed include
lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium, samarium, euro-
pium, gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium,
ytterbium, and lutetium. The concentration of each REE extracted
was proportional to the known abundance in the basaltic rock. At
all simulated gravity levels, S. desiccabilis demonstrated enhanced
biomining capabilities per gram of basalt substrate, producing
32.52 ng under microgravity, 43.09 ng under Mars gravity, and
32.26 ng under Earth’s gravity, compared to the non-biological
mining control, which produced 24.67 ng under microgravity,
21.36 ng under Mars gravity, and 13.25 ng under Earth’s gravity.
These values represent the combined mass of biomined REEs. B.
subtilis and C. metallidurans demonstrated no differences under the
simulated gravity conditions tested and underperformed compared
to the non-biological control. As part of the same ﬂight experiment,
Cockell et al. tested the biomining capabilities for vanadium (a
critical, high-strength element used as a building material), using
the same methods and organisms as the Cockell et al. study
described above160,161. S. desiccabilis and B. subtilis increased mined
vanadium yield, achieving a two-fold increase in mined vanadium
184.92% and 283.22% under microgravity, 216.32% and 219.78%
under Mars gravity, and 208.70% and 221.59% under Earth’s
gravity, respectively, compared to the control160.
With the abundance of iron in Mars regolith (17.9% wt), iron may
be a crucial resource produced through biomining162. Iron is one of
the most-processed metals on Earth that is incorporated in most
building materials and would be heavily relied on for construction,
repair, and maintenance of buildings at extraterrestrial outposts.
Copper is another important metal that can be produced through
biomining, with nearly 20–30% of all copper produced on Earth
extracted through biomining162. For over 30 years, copper has been
an essential metal used in the construction of rocket engines163,164
and being able to extract copper and other minerals from in situ
resources on extraterrestrial outposts will allow engine mainte-
nance and repair to occur beyond LEO, reducing the cost and time
of sending replacement parts from Earth.
Other economically essential elements have been found in
asteroidal material and Martian regolith and can be extracted
through biomining165–167. These include those in the platinum
A.P. Koehle et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

group, including palladium and osmium, and the 17 REEs. During
the Viking Mission to Mars, palladium-silver tubing was utilized in
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry to detect organic com-
pounds, and it would be important for future research on Mars in
the search for extraterrestrial life168. In addition to machinery, REE
can be used in building and ﬁxing methods for power generation,
speciﬁcally solar panels169. Lastly, REE are found in electronic
screens and ﬂuorescent lights, both necessary for data collection,
communication, and the general well-being of those on extra-
terrestrial outposts170.
The biomining process.
Bioreactors are necessary for biomining
reactions to occur. Terrestrial biomining processes most often
occur in open, non-sterile tank reactors that require constant
stirring to distribute oxygen and nutrients171. To implement
biomining on extraterrestrial outposts, it is essential to assess the
extent to which differing gravity levels impact microbe-mineral
interactions within these stirred-tank bioreactors. An experiment
called BioRock, aimed to do this by creating a prototype
biomining reactor for space experimentation on the ISS159. The
biomining reactor has three main components: the culture
chamber, the medium reservoir chamber, and a ﬁxative reservoir
chamber, where a ﬁxative is injected to halt microbial growth after
the biomining reactions take place (Fig. 3). Two biomining reactors
are placed together within two levels of containment. Pre-test
ﬂights found the bioreactors to be successful at growing the
model microorganisms, S. desiccabilis, B. subtilis, and C. metallidur-
ans. These microorganisms were chosen as they are low-risk
pathogens with the ability to survive desiccation for space ﬂight,
limited requirements for growth, and are present in mineral-rich
environments. Growth was determined based on optical density in
nutrient solution after three weeks. For S. desiccabilis, growth
occurred in all tested geometries of biomining reactors, ranging
from 0.308 to 0.804 OD159. BioRock has also been successfully
used to test REE and vanadium biomining capabilities of S.
desiccabilis, B. subtilis, and C. metallidurans in microgravity, Mars
gravity and Earth’s gravity160,161.
An additional method of biomining, proposed by Volger et al.,
utilizes a two-bioreactor system and aims to further enhance ISRU
on Martian outposts compared to traditional bioreactors172. The
ﬁrst system is an algae bioreactor, which utilizes Chlorella vulgaris
to produce biomass for the biomining reactor and oxygen. The
algal biomass is then utilized by Shewanella oneidensis as a growth
medium in the biomining reactor. In the biomining reactor, S.
oneidensis mines iron ores from Martian regolith; the biomass-rich
material left over after extraction can then be used for plant
growth.
Based
on
modeled
algae
growth
and
biomining
performance, the system is projected to produce 0.031 kg O2
per day and 100 kg of iron per Mars year172. This model needs to
be further tested and future experiments should include exposure
to various gravity conditions to assess the impact that this
spaceﬂight stressor will have on growth and performance.
The BioRock experiment and other biomining endeavors using
iron-oxidizing and alternative candidate bacteria demonstrate
potential for biomining in differing gravity levels and the potential
for biomining as a source of ISRU at future Martian and lunar
outposts. Biomining for elements known to be located within
Martian and lunar regolith, such as iron and REE, will be essential
for proper maintenance and production of devices and technol-
ogy that promote sustainability and provide a foundation by
which to launch operations for deep space exploration.
BIOENGINEERED MICROBES FOR SPACE
Microorganisms are an important, renewable resource that can be
leveraged to produce pharmaceuticals or therapeutics, biological
life support systems, and manufacturing materials for human
space exploration and colonization that could help reduce the
need for costly resupply missions beyond LEO173. Candidate
microbes can be chosen for these applications based on the
availability of genetic tools for manipulation, desired metabolic
properties, and tolerance to environmental conditions. These
microbes can be further engineered to make them more well-
suited for biotechnological applications for interplanetary travel or
extraterrestrial settlements using synthetic biology tools. Synthetic
biology involves the rational design or repurposing of living
organisms and biological systems. Using synthetic biology,
microorganisms can be engineered or built de novo with
characterized parts and tools to endow them with new or
improved functions173.
Biotherapeutics
The risk that long-duration space missions pose for crewmembers
is not yet completely understood but the extreme conditions, such
as
microgravity,
radiation,
and
conﬁnement,
coupled
with
microbiome dysregulation may lead to or enhance the disruption
of bodily functions174. Researchers have studied the effect of
simulated or actual spaceﬂight conditions on gastrointestinal (GI)
problems175, the development of diseases such as cancer and
cardiovascular disorders176, or a predisposition to contracting
infections177–179. The use of probiotics as a countermeasure to
2
1
3
Culture 
Chamber
Basalt
Fixative 
Reservoir
Media 
Reservoir
Fig. 3
Schematic depiction of a biomining reactor. The biomining
reactor has three main components: the culture chamber, the media
reservoir chamber, and a ﬁxative reservoir chamber (shown in
section 1). The culture chamber is where the biomining reactions
take place and where the microorganisms reside before the media is
injected. The media reservoir chamber contains the nutrients
required for the biomining reaction to occur and is injected into
the culture chamber to begin the biomining reaction (section 2).
Once the biomining reaction is completed, a ﬁxative is injected to
halt microbial growth (section 3).
A.P. Koehle et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

combat changes in the microbiome as a result of spaceﬂight is
being investigated to support astronaut health on long-duration
space missions180,181. Probiotics are living organisms able to
survive in the gastric environment that provide health beneﬁts
and maintain or improve microbiome balance when consumed.
On Earth, probiotics have been used to treat many ailments
including weight and muscle loss, inﬂammation, dermatitis,
immune disorders, mental health, and GI conditions (i.e., diarrhea,
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), inﬂammatory bowel disease
(IBD))180,182.
Probiotic viability in space.
Promising probiotic candidates for
space missions could include Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus, to
counteract their decrease in relative abundance in the astronaut
microbiome during spaceﬂight183,184. While these species are
commercially used on Earth their efﬁcacy and long-term viability
when used and stored in space has to still be veriﬁed. In 2017,
Shao et al. examined the viability of Lactobacillus acidophilus in
simulated microgravity and observed no effect on cellular
morphology or adhesion. However, some biological changes were
present compared to controls, such as increased growth rate at
early time points, acid tolerance (pH < 2.5) by ~22–32%, bile
tolerance
at
low
concentrations,
antibacterial
activity,
and
resistance to antibiotics (i.e., cefalexin, gentamicin, penicillin)185.
The following year, the shelf life of freeze-dried Lactobacillus casei
strain Shirota press-through capsules was tested in spaceﬂight
conditions aboard the ISS186. After one month of storage in
ambient conditions (i.e., temperature 20–24.5 °C, absorbed dose
rate 0.26 mGy/day) and six months after the start of the
experiment, bacteria in ﬂight samples were sustained in sufﬁcient
numbers that were comparable to ground controls. There were no
observed changes in probiotic viability, and the basic probiotic
properties of the bacteria including growth rate, carbohydrate
fermentation, cell-wall polysaccharide integrity, and resistance to
intracellular
digestion
remained
intact
upon
thawing186.
A
lengthier
shelf-life
analysis
of
freeze-dried
cells
for
three
commercial
probiotics
including
Biﬁdobacterium
longum,
L.
acidophilus and spores of B. subtilis was then performed in a
simulated three-year round-trip to Mars187. In under 200 days, B.
longum and L. acidophilus viability was decreased by about 2-logs
while B. subtilis maintained viability up to the end of the
experiment (545 days). Therefore, researchers concluded that
freeze-dried bacterial spores showed the most promise for
withstanding long-duration space missions including ambient
spacecraft conditions and radiation with an estimated shelf-life of
4.7 years187. Overall, these studies provide foundational informa-
tion on the storage, stability, and viability of probiotic candidates
when ﬂown in space. These results suggest that with further
testing, probiotic bacteria can be an essential component of the
astronaut medical toolkit for the maintenance of a healthy gut
microbiome, prevention and treatment of bacterial infections or
medical concerns that may arise in future space missions.
Engineered probiotics to combat infection.
In addition to the
observed decrease in beneﬁcial bacteria, microbial tracking
studies have shown that spaceﬂight conditions can also lead to
an increase in opportunistic
pathogens in both the built
microbiome
and
astronaut
microbiome.
This
is
particularly
problematic due to the dysregulated immunity of astronauts in
space178. Since antibiotics are the most commonly used ther-
apeutic for the treatment of bacterial infections, researchers are
investigating whether microbes can be used for antibiotic
production in space. This is particularly relevant considering that
antibiotics are known to have accelerated degradation and
decreased efﬁcacy when ﬂown and stored in space for long
periods of time188. On the Space Shuttle Mission STS-77, Lam et al.
analyzed the effects of spaceﬂight on the production of monorden
by Humicola fuscoatra WC5157, a marine fungus. Monorden has
demonstrated antimicrobial activity against pathogenic fungi and
antitumour activity on human tumor cell growth in vitro189. Using
solid-state
fermentation,
researchers
observed
up
to
190%
increased yield of the antifungal in spaceﬂight compared to
ground controls at 23.8 and 8.2 μg, respectively190. Similar results
were obtained in another study analyzing the production of
actinomycin D, an antibiotic and antitumor agent, by Streptomyces
plicatus on the ISS. After 17 days in orbit, the amount of antibiotic
produced by ISS samples increased by up to 577% compared to
ground controls191, and over a 72-day period, researchers noted
increased production of actinomycin D in ISS samples speciﬁcally
at early time points192. While much work is yet to be done toward
on-demand microbial production of antibiotics in space, these
studies demonstrate that microbes are a promising platform for
this application. Elucidating the mechanism driving this increased
yield early in antibiotic production in microgravity could enable
the engineering of bacteria for enhanced antibiotic or therapeutic
bioprocessing in space or even be applied to increase antibiotic
production on Earth.
Antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD) may arise in space as a side
effect of administering antibiotics to treat infections. Several
studies have investigated the use of Debaryomyces hansenii as a
treatment for AAD in a mouse model. D. hansenii is commonly
used in the food industry for the processing of cheese and has
been identiﬁed as part of the human gut microbiome193,194. When
administered for treatment of AAD, D. hansenii alters the
composition of the microbiome by promoting the growth of
beneﬁcial lactase-producing bacteria and by inhibiting the growth
of opportunistic pathogens195–197. In one study, the presence of
Proteobacteria in the intestinal mucosa increased in response to
diarrhea, from ~19% in a normal group to ~36% in an AAD model
group, and treatment with D. hansenii was able to restore
Proteobacteria to normal levels195. Proteobacteria abundance
often positively correlates with IBD and inﬂammation and is
generally regarded as an indicator of microbiome instability198. In
spaceﬂight, the proportion of Proteobacteria in the astronaut skin
microbiome was decreased, namely Gammaproteobacteria and
Betaproteobacteria175, while it was increased in the salivary
microbiome199.
While bacterial infections are typically treated with antimicro-
bials, the formation of bioﬁlms and propagation of multi-drug
resistance in the spaceﬂight environment (discussed later in this
review) limits these therapeutic options. A promising alternative
currently being investigated on Earth is the use of engineered
microorganisms as live biotherapeutics (e.g., biosensors, probiotics
with enhanced beneﬁts, and drug delivery systems)200–204. Well-
established microbial chassis organisms include E. coli and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, though a microbe more well-suited to
the target therapeutic environment or application can also be
chosen. One example using a less conventional chassis was
recently performed by Garrido et al. where they engineered
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, a human lung pathogen, as a live
biotherapeutic to treat S. aureus and other bioﬁlm-associated
infections in vivo205. Researchers created an attenuated strain of
M. pneumoniae able to secrete anti-bioﬁlm and bactericidal
enzymes, dispersin B and lysostaphin, and demonstrated its
ability to eliminate an S. aureus bioﬁlm in a mouse model205.
Another candidate chassis that could be employed to eradicate
pathogens
is
D.
hansenii,
which
produces
volatile
organic
compounds and mycocins that have demonstrated antimicrobial
effects on several pathogenic bacteria and fungi. An alternative to
secreting bactericidal proteins to kill pathogens is the incorpora-
tion of CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing technology into synthetic
designs to create engineered probiotics for targeted bacterial
killing. This was demonstrated by Neil et al. by delivering CRISPR/
Cas9 on a conjugative plasmid which led to 99.9% eradication of
antibiotic resistant E. coli and complete eradication of Citrobacter
rodentium in the GI tract of a mouse model206. CRISPR/Cas9 gene
A.P. Koehle et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

editing has also been demonstrated in D. hansenii207, and could
be applied to engineer this strain for increased production of
mycocins that can target C. albicans208,209.
Microbes can also be engineered as biosensors to identify or
inhibit pathogenic bacteria by sensing an important indicator
molecule and releasing a signal or enzyme in response. For
instance, biological targeting systems have been demonstrated
using engineered E. coli for directed killing of the bioﬁlm-
associated pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a bacterium that
has been demonstrated to have increased bioﬁlm formation and
pathogenicity on the ISS210. Saeidi et al. engineered E. coli with a
synthetic genetic circuit containing three modules: sensing, lysing,
and
killing.
The
sensing
module
includes
a
constitutively
expressed transcription factor, lasR, which detects and binds to
N-Acyl homoserine lactone (AHL), a quorum sensing molecule
released from P. aeruginosa. This bound complex activates the
lysing and killing modules expressing lysis E7 and pyocin S5
proteins, respectively. This leads to perforation of the E. coli cell
membrane and release of the bacteriocin which targets the
pathogen and killed 99% of viable cells211. Following this study,
Hwang et al. programmed E. coli with a modular circuit containing
the same sensing module coupled to a motility and killing
module. The motility module expressed the chemotaxis protein
CheZ to initiate motility toward the pathogen, while the killing
module produced antimicrobial and bioﬁlm-degrading proteins,
MccS and DNaseI. Viability of P. aeruginosa was examined and
found that E. coli harboring both the motility and killing biosensor
modules resulted in the killing of 60% of cells210. Biological
sensors to detect and/or reduce pathogenic bacteria using
traditional chassis such as engineered Lactobacillus or E. coli have
also been demonstrated against intestinal P. aeruginosa212,
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus213, Candida albicans214, and S.
aureus215,216. These studies highlight the vast potential of
engineered microbes to sense and kill space microbiome-
associated pathogens and disrupt bioﬁlms. Since the choice of
probiotics is both bacteria- and ailment-dependent217, the use of
synthetic biology to create genetically engineered biotherapeutics
with higher complexity and multiple functions (i.e., able to target
multiple pathogens) is vital to minimize the amount of cargo on
future space missions. The viability of these therapeutics for
humans and their ability to function in the conditions of
spaceﬂight still need to be investigated, but these examples help
to shed light on what the next generation of engineered
biotherapeutics could offer.
Engineered probiotics for disease prevention and detection.
Engi-
neered probiotics can also be a valuable tool for the prevention or
detection of more serious health issues such as GI disorders,
kidney stones, cancer, and cardiovascular disease (CVD), or the
treatment of their associated symptoms. Space-induced changes
in the gut microbiome observed in astronauts aboard the ISS by
Voorhies et al. included an increase in Parasutterella, a bacteria
associated with IBD175. In IBD pathology, purinergic receptors are
activated by extracellular adenosine triphosphate (eATP) released
by commensal gut bacteria and immune cells, promoting
intestinal inﬂammation. Engineered yeast probiotics containing a
human P2Y2 purinergic receptor have been developed for the
treatment of IBD by responding to physiological eATP levels and
secreting the eATP-degrading enzyme apyrase218. This probiotic
was shown to be effective in a mouse model of IBD, decreasing
intestinal inﬂammation and dysbiosis. Bacterial probiotics can also
be engineered to detect gut inﬂammation by sensing tetrathio-
nate, thiosulfate or nitric oxide219,220, or with programmable
memory systems to detect and respond to an environmental
stimulus221.
The
risk
of
kidney
stones
due
to
bone
decalciﬁcation,
dehydration, or increased growth rate of calcium-depositing
nanobacteria222–224 is increased in spaceﬂight, which could also
be prevented or treated using probiotics. Calcium oxalate is the
major component of kidney stones, therefore ideal probiotic
bacteria are efﬁcient in oxalate degradation, such as Oxalobacter
formigenes225 and B. subtilis. B. subtilis strain 168 has been
presented as a novel probiotic therapy as it has been shown to
break down the oxalate in kidney stones in a Drosophila model226.
The oxalate decarboxylase (OxDC) enzyme derived from B. subtilis
can also be used to engineer other bacteria as probiotics for the
treatment of kidney stones. The expression and subsequent
puriﬁcation of this enzyme in E. coli was able to reduce oxalate
concentrations in a mouse model in urine and feces by 44% and
72%, respectively, compared to controls227. The OxDC gene was
also introduced into Lactobacillus plantarum on a plasmid, leading
to expression and secretion of this enzyme where it was able to
degrade 70–77% of oxalate in vitro, and reduced oxalate as well as
calcium, uric acid, creatinine, serum uric acid, and BUN/creatinine
ratio in urine compared to controls in a rat model228.
Probiotics including Lactobacillus and Biﬁdobacterium can also
be used to improve cardiovascular health by reducing weight,
cholesterol, and adipose tissue while also preventing or attenuat-
ing injuries to the heart (e.g., heart failure, ischemia, cardiac
hypertrophy)229. Using a rat model, Lactobacillus rhamnosus or a
placebo was administered to subjects following coronary artery
occlusion for a six-week duration. Compared to placebo controls,
rats given the probiotic treatment showed attenuation of left
ventricular hypertrophy, improved systolic and diastolic left
ventricular function, and additional improvements up to six weeks
after withdrawing treatment230. Other Lactobacillus species have
had positive effects on CVD including L. plantarum which helped
to reduce serum levels of leptin and ﬁbrinogen, which are CVD risk
factors231. These probiotics can also be genetically engineered to
enhance their potential beneﬁts. For instance, E. coli Nissle 1917
has
been
genetically
engineered
to
produce
N-acylphosphatidylethanolamines which, when administered to
mice, led to decreased adiposity, insulin resistance and lipid
accumulation in the liver232. This has important implications for
astronauts as spaceﬂight can induce negative, aging-like effects
on the cardiovascular system (i.e., decreased ﬁtness, arterial
stiffening, and insulin resistance) and radiation exposure has
been well-characterized to increase the risk of developing
radiation-induced cardiovascular disease (RICVD)233,234.
Crewmembers are at an elevated risk of cancer development
due to radiation and other spaceﬂight factors235–237. As such,
methods for cancer prevention and treatment are important to
implement during deep space exploration and bacterial-mediated
cancer therapies could be a promising approach Bacteria can be
used naturally or engineered for cancer therapy to speciﬁcally
target and colonize tumors, or as a drug delivery system for
anticancer agents238. Many bacteria have been investigated for
these applications including Biﬁdobacterium239, E. coli240–242,
Clostridium243,244, Salmonella245–249, and Streptococcus250 species.
A study using E. coli engineered with synthetic adhesins to target
a tumor antigen in vivo found that lower doses of engineered E.
coli were required to colonize tumors compared to wild-type
controls240. Tumor targeting was also demonstrated in an
attenuated strain of Salmonella typhimurium harboring a short
hairpin RNA expression plasmid. It was engineered to target
inhibin, a tumor marker, resulting in signiﬁcant inhibition of colon
cancer and melanoma growth in a mouse tumor model247.
Bacteria can also be engineered to improve tumor and metastasis
visualization within mammalian hosts, facilitating their use as
diagnostic and therapeutic microbial agents. For example, E. coli
was engineered to express an acoustic reporter gene allowing
them to be imaged noninvasively in vivo and to produce protein-
nanoparticle gas vesicles for targeted breast cancer therapy242. E.
coli was also engineered with lacZ, encoding the β-galactosidase
reporter, which can be easily detected in urine as an indicator of
liver metastasis251.
A.P. Koehle et al.
10
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Bacteria hold great potential for the development of easily
modiﬁable biotherapeutics that could be invaluable for treatment
or prevention of health issues during long-duration space
missions. However, additional research and clinical validation is
necessary before employing engineered bacteria as biotherapeu-
tics for space-associated disorders and diseases.
Life support and nutrition
BLSS can provide crew members with oxygen, food, and water,
and will be imperative for long-duration space missions and for
the establishment of sustainable human habitats on the Moon or
Mars. Due to their diverse applications for spaceﬂight, microalgae
and cyanobacteria are often studied for their incorporation in BLSS
and photobioreactors. They produce oxygen, remove carbon
dioxide from the environment and help with water puriﬁca-
tion104,105,252,253. These microbes are also edible allowing their
biomass to provide nutritional and therapeutic beneﬁts without
the need for protein puriﬁcation35,254.
Enhanced photosynthesis.
Oxygen for astronauts on the ISS is
currently transported in pressurized tanks from Earth or is
produced using water onboard through electrolysis255. Therefore,
the ability to improve carbon uptake and oxygen output using
microbes on the ISS, for space travel and in future extraterrestrial
habitats, is an essential step toward the creation of sustainable
and self-sufﬁcient systems. Oxygen production, CO2 capture, and
photosynthetic capacity could be enhanced in BLSS using
synthetic biology tools to address the bottleneck of photosynth-
esis: the carbon ﬁxation cycle. Metabolic engineering of cyano-
bacteria can improve photosynthetic capacity as demonstrated by
Berepiki et al. where expression of mammalian cytochrome P450
(CYP1A1) acting as an electron sink in Synechococcus PCC 7002
improved photosynthetic efﬁciency and increased electron ﬂow
rate by ~30%256. Using the same cytochrome P450 gene, Santos-
Marino
et
al.
engineered
metabolic
pathways
for
sucrose
production and cytochrome P450 as a carbon and electron sink,
respectively,
into
Synechococcus
elongatus.
Ultimately,
this
resulted in increased photosynthesis, and simultaneous expres-
sion of both sinks had an additive effect on photosystem I
oxidation and photosystem II efﬁciency257. Another strategy to
improve this cycle is by increasing the substrate concentration of
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase-oxygenase
(RuBisCo)
to
improve carbon uptake. In the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp.
PCC6803, one study found that genetic installation of additional
bicarbonate transporters resulted in a 2-fold increase in carbon
uptake and biomass258. Metabolic engineering of cyanobacteria
can also be used to produce industrially relevant high-value
chemicals and bioproducts such as biofuels. Some engineering
efforts have been demonstrated in the model cyanobacteria
species, S. elongatus PCC7942 and Synechocystis sp. PCC6803, to
produce ethanol, ethylene, isobutyraldehyde, and isoprene259–262.
The biotechnologically relevant bacteria, Ralstonia eutropha (i.e., C.
necator) has also been engineered by Dogutan and Nocera to
capture CO2 to produce biofuels and edible biomass, in an
artiﬁcial photosynthetic cycle that is much more efﬁcient than
those that are naturally occurring263.
Microbial production of nutrients.
In addition to oxygen, micro-
algae can provide a sufﬁcient source of proteins, carbohydrates,
fatty acids, minerals, and vitamins required for a balanced
diet264,265. These nutritional outputs can be further enhanced
using synthetic biology approaches. Genome editing technologies
for these marine species have expanded over the last 20 years,
namely due to improvements in DNA sequencing, manipulation
techniques and availability of genomic information266. Some of
these methods and technologies include DNA delivery via
conjugation, the generation of auxotrophic strains, and DNA-free
or plasmid-based genome editing (e.g., using CRISPR/Cas9)267–270.
Therefore, it is possible to create cell factories using metabolic
engineering to alter the composition or nutritional output of these
species271–273. For example, mutagenesis and CRISPR/Cas9 gene
editing technologies have been used to modify the biomass
composition of the model algae species Chlamydomonas rein-
hardtii. Irradiated mutant strains have been generated with double
the starch content compared to the wild-type strain through
increased expression of phosphoglucomutase 1 (PGM1) and
decreased expression of downstream enzymes in the glycolytic
pathway274. C. reinhardtii has also been engineered to knock out
the zeaxanthin epoxidase gene resulting in 47-fold increased
production of the carotenoid zeaxanthin, which is important in the
prevention of macular degeneration275, a concern facing astro-
nauts during prolonged spaceﬂight276.
Synthetic biology approaches are also being used to genetically
engineer microorganisms for the production and long-term
storage of nutrients as part of NASA’s BioNutrients projects277.
Nutrient production and storage on long-duration space missions
is a challenge as they can degrade over time. Therefore, this
project aims to develop a system for on-demand microbial
production of micronutrients on the ISS, whereby packages of
dehydrated, edible yeast can be hydrated and consumed. In the
ﬁrst
segment of the project,
BioNutrients-1,
Saccharomyces
cerevisiae and S. boulardii species were engineered to produce
antioxidants
with
genes
for
zeaxanthin
and
beta-carotene
biosynthesis pathways, respectively277. The S. boulardii genome
was also engineered to stimulate increased trehalose stores and
with tardigrade-derived cytosolic abundant heat soluble (CAHS)
genes, both resulting in increased tolerance to desiccation. Along
with these strains, several other edible microorganisms are being
tested for their storage and survival in stasis packages in the
ambient conditions of the space environment. These include
yogurt-producing and milk-coagulating bacteria (Lactobacillus
delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, Streptococcus salivarius subsp. thermo-
philus, B. subtilis and Bacillus coagulans), yeasts (Kluyveromyces
lactis and Komagataella phafﬁi Kurtzman) and C1-utilizing bacteria
(Methylobacterium extorquens and C. necator). The production and
stasis packages were delivered to the ISS and will be analyzed for
growth and nutrient expression for a ﬁve-year duration. After
47 days, initial stasis package data showed no signiﬁcant
difference in the viability of bacteria stored on the ISS compared
to
ground
controls278.
These
organisms
are
all
attractive
candidates
for
biological
engineering
to
produce
vitamins,
therapeutics, or other useful enzymes for maintaining crew health.
In addition to continued testing of the production of carotenoids,
BioNutrients-2279 aims to further develop the bioproduction
system from BioNutrients-1 by expanding the variety of probiotic
products on the ISS to include yogurt and keﬁr and investigate the
production of follistatin by the engineered yeast K. lactis279. The
results
of
the
BioNutrients
project
will
provide
invaluable
information for the feasibility of using microbes as a platform
for nutrient storage and production for long-term space travel.
Engineered biomaterials
In-space manufacturing and development can be challenging as
necessary materials and supplies are not readily available and
currently need to be transported or resupplied from Earth.
Microbes offer a solution as they can be reprogrammed for the
production of biologically derived materials (i.e., bioplastics,
nanomaterials)280 to generate useful components such as plastics,
adhesives,
composites,
and
rubbers
for
structural
space
applications.
Gel-based materials.
One material that would be beneﬁcial to
produce in situ beyond LEO is aerogels. Aerogels, ﬁrst created by
Kistler in 1931, are human-made, low-density solid materials with
A.P. Koehle et al.
11
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

an interconnected porous network composed of 99.8% air, with
the most common type being silica-based281. Photosynthetic
organisms that can produce silica, primarily algae diatoms (e.g.,
Phaeodactylum tricornutum), are of interest for the generation of
silica-based aerogels and have recently been incorporated into
cellulose aerogel composites282,283. Aerogels are useful materials
for space applications due to their low thermal conductivity, light
weight, and high porosity284–286. To improve the habitability of
other planets for humans and photosynthetic organisms, silica
aerogels provide the beneﬁt of allowing for the transmission of
visible light for photosynthesis while simultaneously blocking
hazardous UV radiation284. In addition, since aerogels are a
thermally insulating material, they can raise surface temperatures
through the solid-state greenhouse effect284. NASA is currently
taking advantage of the thermal insulating properties of aerogels
to protect spacecraft and rovers from the cold Martian surface
temperature, such as for the Mars Pathﬁnder lander, Mars
exploration rovers (Spirit and Opportunity) and Mars Science
Laboratory mission (Curiosity rover)286. Aerogels have also been
used as a method for capturing particles from space without
damaging them, as demonstrated in the Stardust Mission286.
Therefore, using a synthetic biology approach to generate
aerogels from silica-producing organisms could be interesting to
investigate further.
Other gel-based materials can also be synthesized using
synthetic biology. For instance, Kim et al. took advantage of the
structural properties of synthetic spider silk287,288 and mussel
adhesive proteins, which can act as biological adhesives289,290, to
engineer E. coli with a spidroin-amyloid-mussel foot hybrid protein
that can ultimately assemble into a hydrogel with high strength
and underwater adhesion291. The hybrid protein consisted of a
zipper domain from an amyloid protein, a ﬂexible domain from
spider silk, and a dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA)-containing
mussel foot protein. This is a great example of how synthetic
biology can be used to generate bacterial hosts expressing
recombinant proteins with novel or desirable functions and
properties, which can be applied to tackle speciﬁc manufacturing
challenges in space. In addition, methods to spatially control the
distribution of microbial cells into hydrogel structures have been
developed using a Stereolithographic Apparatus for Microbial
(SLAM) Bioprinting 3D printer292. Bioresins composed of synthetic
polymers were used to contain the microorganisms and mimic
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) that are fundamental to
bioﬁlm formation in nature293. The power of this technology was
demonstrated by printing engineered Caulobacter crescentus as
uranium biosensors within this biomaterial using a uranium
responsive promoter fused to GFP and measuring the ﬂuores-
cence output292. This technology could enable genetic engineer-
ing of single strains, microbiomes, and bioﬁlms to be used not
only for biomanufacturing but also for biomining, biotherapeutics,
and bioremediation.
Polymer production and degradation.
Plastic materials continue
to play a vital role in the manufacturing of spacesuits and
spacecraft. Progress has been made towards the sustainable
production of high-strength, biodegradable plastics in engineered
microorganisms. Speciﬁcally, efforts have been made to increase
the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) or polyhydrox-
ybutyrate (PHB) in engineered cyanobacteria, Synechococcus294
and Synechocystis sp. PCC6803295,296. Synechocystis sp. PCC6803
has been engineered with the PHA biosynthetic pathway of R.
eutropha (i.e., Cupriavidus necator)296 or the overexpression of
sigE295 to increase PHA and PHB production,
respectively.
Metabolic engineering of the shikimate pathway in B. subtilis or
S. cerevisiae for the increased production of para-aminobenzoic
acid (pABA) has also been studied, which can act as a precursor for
high-strength polymers (e.g., aramid ﬁbers)297,298. Ultimately,
these biologically derived materials can be used to manufacture
parts or even 3D-print hardware in space299.
To make in-space manufacturing and construction off-planet
more sustainable, ISRU or recycling of existing material compo-
nents to produce feedstock for new materials is necessary300.
Microorganisms offer a solution to this problem as many can
naturally degrade polymers for metabolic products. Black fungi,
which are a diverse group of extremophilic melanized fungi, have
been investigated for this application due to their demonstrated
ability to hydrolyze synthetic polymers301). For instance, Aureoba-
sidium pullulans, a black fungus, has demonstrated microbial
deterioration of plasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and dioctyl
adipate plasticizers302. Knuﬁa chersonesos, another black fungus,
has been shown to completely break down the synthetic
copolymer polybutylene adipate terephthalate (PBAT)303. Secre-
tome screening identiﬁed seven polyesterase enzymes that could
potentially be involved in this observed polymer degradation,
which lays the foundation for the possibility of further engineering
of this biosynthetic pathway for more efﬁcient degradation303.
Therefore, this group of extremophilic organisms are promising
candidates for plastic degradation, however, this process still
needs to be investigated in simulated or spaceﬂight microgravity.
Microgravity studies of K. cheronesos that analyzed the effects of
simulated microgravity on the proteome and secretome found
that scytalone dehydratase gene expression was upregulated in
the wild-type strain and downregulated in a melanin-deﬁcient
mutant strain304. This enzyme is involved in the biosynthesis of
dihydroxynaphthalene
melanin,
which
is
believed
to
have
protective qualities that fungi use to withstand the extreme
conditions of space305. This suggests that Knuﬁa species, and
potentially other black fungi have the properties to withstand
space conditions and are good candidates for plastic degradation
in space. Since then, various other extremophilic fungi have been
tested for their survival in space, through exposure to simulated
Mars conditions306,307. These include 12 Chernobyl-isolated strains
(i.e., Cladosporium, Acremonium, Beauveria, Fusarium, Trichoderma,
Penicillium, Aureobasidium, Aspergillus and Apiospora), the black
fungi Exophiala jeanselmei, and the microcolonial fungi Cryomyces
antarcticus and Knuﬁa perforans. Plastic degradation has also been
investigated in extremophilic bacteria, for example Streptomyces
thermoviolaceus, Geobacillus thermocatenulatus and Clostridium
thermocellum308. As these extremophilic fungi and bacteria have
been shown to withstand space conditions, thus they are
promising candidates to use or engineer for plastic degradation
in space. Ultimately, the capacity for manufacturing in space will
be beneﬁcial for long-duration space missions, reducing the need
to bring materials as cargo or have them launched from Earth, and
allowing for on-demand production of materials based on
immediate need.
Myco-architecture
Astronauts venturing out beyond Earth’s protective magneto-
sphere will be exposed to hazardous radiation during deep-space
exploration missions. This includes high-energy electromagnetic
waves from our sun such as UV radiation, gamma, and X-rays or
sub-atomic
particles
from
the
cosmos
(electrons,
protons,
neutrons, and heavy metal ions), known as galactic cosmic
radiation. These forms of radiation strip electrons from molecules
resulting in protein or DNA damage through production of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species309,310. The result is short-
term or long-term health problems such as cancer, acute radiation
sickness, radiation-induced cardiovascular disease, and neurologi-
cal damage278. Developing a solution for passive radiation
protection for astronauts will be a critical step towards sustaining
long-term presence on the Moon and Mars. The average person
on Earth is exposed to about 6.2 mSv of radiation over a period of
a year, while the average astronaut on the ISS is exposed to
approximately 144 mSv311. One year into a three-year mission to
A.P. Koehle et al.
12
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Mars, an astronaut would already have been exposed to some
400 mSv of radiation311,312. Due to the complex nature of space
radiation, there is likely no one-size-ﬁts-all solution to this
problem. Some proposed architectural concepts for radiation
production include building below ground in lava tubes or piling
meters of regolith outside of a structure313,314 and while materials
like lead and aluminum may be effective, they would be costly to
transport315. As a result, the search for innovative radiation shields
will depend in part on biotechnology, which holds unique
advantages such as suitability for ISRU, self-regeneration, and
adaptability. By selecting model organisms such as extremophiles,
that use radiation as an energy source, we can begin to
understand their properties and reﬁne testing for technology
development.
Fungi on Earth have been isolated in high-radiation environ-
ments, such as the contamination zone of the Chernobyl Nuclear
Power Plant316,317, inside the ISS317, and exteriors of spacecraft in
LEO305. Analogous to phototrophy, fungi appear to perform
radiosynthesis, using pigments known as melanin to convert
gamma radiation into chemical energy318,319. Melanin has the
capability to absorb electromagnetic radiation, resist acids, and
perform powerful antioxidant activity allowing some fungi to
thrive in the most extreme environments on Earth or beyond,
including those with high levels of ionizing radiation320,321.
Studies examining the survival rates of melanized and non-
melanized yeasts with gamma radiation have shown that melanin-
rich fungi were able to shield ionizing radiation at efﬁcacies
comparable to lead and twice as effective as charcoal, whereas the
non-melanized strains lacked the capability to provide shield-
ing322. This may not only be due to the presence of melanin itself
but the spatial arrangement of it within the cell, as it was observed
that in Cryptococcus neoformans, melanin arranged in a spherical
shape, covering the inner surface of the cell membrane, resulted
in superior shielding from radiation323, hypothesized to be due to
the increase in scattering of incident photons318. Melanin is not
the sole mechanism by which fungi survive radiation exposure. In
a study using melanized yeast Exophiala dermatitidis, it was found
that nutrient availability, culture density, metabolic state and DNA
repair mechanisms were better determinants of cell survival after
gamma radiation exposure than melanin324. Other mechanisms
that protect fungi against radiation involve enzymes that remove
reactive oxygen species or those that promote DNA repair, either
through nucleotide excision or photoreactivation325, and various
other secondary metabolites, such as the antioxidant pyranonigrin
A326. Due to the ability of various fungi to withstand, thrive, and
even attenuate space-relevant doses of radiation306,316,318,327–330
there is keen interest in their use for the development of radiation-
resistant shields or structures305,330–332.
Fungal mycelium, a ﬁlamentous network of hyphae, is a ﬁbrous
material that can be used as structural components for the
construction of habitats, buildings, furniture, etc.333. Fungal
mycelium as a construction material has attractive characteristics
including self-healing potential, impressive compressive strength,
ﬂexibility, insulation, and hydrophobicity333. The use of mycelium-
based materials and structures in space would be a sustainable,
biodegradable option with demonstrated uses for generating
textiles332 and as an alternative to plastic packaging. Haneef et al.
used two edible and medicinal fungi, Ganoderma lucidum and
Pleurotus ostreatus, to produce mycelium ﬁlms composed of
polysaccharides, lipids, protein, and chitin334. The fungi were
grown on two different substrates; cellulose or cellulose with PDB,
and the ﬁnal composition and characteristics of the ﬁlm differed
based on which substrate they were exposed to334. This suggests
that myco-architecture properties could be modulated simply by
varying the growth substrate. Biocomposites combining fungal
mycelium with cellulose plant ﬁbers335 or with wood and cellulose
nanoﬁbrils have also been investigated336. Since they are living
organisms, synthetic biology could be used to engineer fungi to
secrete other useful structural components such as polymers, for
even more complex structures. Indeed, CRISPR-Cas9 methodology
has been used to create gene deletions in Paecilomyces variotii, a
Chernobyl fungal isolate, and was used to identify the gene
responsible for its radiation resistance337. This technology could
be further employed to enhance various fungi for deep space
applications, such as making them better suited for radiation
shielding.
Concrete production
Another promising construction material to shield humans, plants
and (possibly even) animals from the harsh Lunar and Martian
environments is concrete. Concrete is a promising material for
space applications as it is strong (it has proven to be the most
durable material against natural disasters and extreme weather
events), resistant to burns, rust and rot and could be made with
engineered microbes and in situ resources. Concrete is composed
of three main components: water, cement, and an aggregate (i.e.,
sand, gravel). Researchers have discovered that the use of human
serum albumin combined with regolith from the Moon or Mars as
the concrete aggregate can produce a concrete-like biocomposite
that is made even stronger with the addition of urea338.
Alternatives for cement, one of the main components of concrete,
can be made using engineered bacteria to express recombinant or
structural proteins, such as bovine or human serum albumin339
and spider silk340. This way, protein production and puriﬁcation
can be scaled-up and ultimately mixed with in situ regolith, rather
than extracting them directly from the source.
Microbes can further aid in the production of concrete through
soil biocementation using microbially induced calcite precipitation
(MICP)341. This is a process wherein microorganisms precipitate
calcium carbonate, the main component of limestone and
cement, by urea hydrolysis or CO2-concentration341. For this
reason, candidate microbes are typically highly urease-active
bacteria, such as Sporosarcina pasteurii (formerly known as Bacillus
pasteurii)342,343. One of the limitations of concrete is that it can
often crack due to shrinkage. Incorporation of microorganisms
into these structures can provide a sustainable solution for in-
space construction but also a long-term biotechnological solution
for concrete maintenance through crack remediation. Bacteria
embedded in the concrete, resulting in what is often termed
“living” or “self-healing” concrete, can repair cracks that form over
time through the precipitation of calcium carbonate crystals344.
This has been investigated using microorganisms including
microalgae (Synechococcus and Spirulina)345,346, Bacillus347, and
Deinococcus radiodurans348. Concrete is a harsh, alkaline environ-
ment (~pH 12) and therefore relies on hardy microbes tolerant of
these conditions. The ability for Bacillus to form spores and its
resistance to alkaline conditions makes this microbe a promising
candidate for survival in the high pH concrete environment.
Concrete remediation using MICP by spore-forming Bacillus
species was demonstrated by Ramachandran et al.349 and later
by Jonkers et al., who demonstrated that the spores remained
viable for up to four months350. While this is a promising start,
experiments need to be performed to determine whether
bacterial spores can remain viable for longer durations. The B.
subtilis gene cluster and molecular mechanism involved in calcium
carbonate biomineralization have been identiﬁed351 and therefore
could be used to engineer novel bacteria with enhanced self-
healing capabilities or resistance to the concrete environment.
Using extremophilic bacteria that can tolerate both the
concrete and space environment to produce calcium carbonate
may allow for the construction of Lunar or Martian structures with
increased durability or radiation resistance. One such candidate is
the cyanobacterium Synechococcus, a photosynthetic organism
that can withstand extreme environmental conditions. Using
Synechococcus PCC8806, Zhu et al. incorporated cyanobacteria
A.P. Koehle et al.
13
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

into a mixture of hydrated concrete powder and sand. Results
showed that 38% more calcium was precipitated in conditions
containing cyanobacteria than in controls, and the microbial
calcite layer on the concrete surface was thicker, more adhesive,
and decreased water absorption by twofold345. More recently,
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, was tested for incorporation in a
sand-hydrogel scaffold352,353. Following inoculation into a scaffold
of sand, gelatin and media, the microbial viability was analyzed in
varying temperature and humidity conditions. While the scaffold
was strongest at ambient conditions, cells were not viable after
seven days, however at 50% or 100% humidity, 9% and 14% of the
cells
remained
viable
after
30
days,
respectively352.
Since
desiccation appeared to reduce cell viability, another study
analyzed whether changes in component ratios or addition of
trehalose would allow for increased viability. They found that
using a desiccation protectant like trehalose led to increased cell
viability at ambient temperature without sacriﬁcing the mechan-
ical properties of the structure353. Maintaining cell viability of
cyanobacteria in the concrete structure is vital for enhancing the
crack-healing potential, which was shown to be promising in a
recent study using S. elongatus and S. platensis at varying
concentrations (i.e., 4, 8 and 12%)346. An alternative strategy to
combat desiccation would be the use of a desiccation-resistant
organism such as D. radiodurans, which is a polyextremophilic
bacteria known for its resistance to radiation. Unlike some of the
other candidate bacteria, D. radiodurans is non-spore forming and
therefore has applications for low-temperature conditions348. D.
radiodurans was shown to be viable for up to 28 days in concrete,
providing signiﬁcant crack healing and increasing the compressive
strength of the mortar by 42% at room temperature and 38% at
near-freezing temperatures348. Strategies enlisting microbes in
combination with Lunar or Martian regolith provide a blueprint for
ISRU for manufacturing strong, radiation-resistant structures that
could further space exploration efforts and the possibility for
human habitation on the Moon and Mars.
NEGATIVE IMPACT OF MICROBES AND MITIGATION
STRATEGIES
While
microbes
offer
many
beneﬁts
and
biotechnological
solutions for extended spaceﬂight and the development of
sustainable habitats beyond LEO, they can also have a negative
impact on space exploration. This can manifest as increased
microbial pathogenicity, horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of proble-
matic genes, and bioﬁlm formation which have direct effects on
crew
health
and
spacecraft
integrity.
Understanding
how
microbes respond to the space environment, will allow for
mitigation strategies to be developed and implemented, to
ensure successful long-duration space exploration.
Pathogenicity
Several studies have demonstrated that the conditions and stress
of spaceﬂight can enhance microbial virulence or pathogenicity,
as has been observed with many human-associated pathogens
either grown or isolated on the ISS and/or in simulated
microgravity conditions. Examples include Klebsiella pneumonia354,
P. aeruginosa355, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium356,357,
Serratia marcescens358, enterotoxigenic E. coli359, and Aspergillus
fumigatus360. The presence of microorganisms with heightened
virulence could increase the risk of crewmembers contracting
infections, even more problematic due dysregulated immunity
during spaceﬂight179. S. typhimurium grown under modeled
microgravity (MMG)356 and in spaceﬂight357 showed increased
virulence compared to ground controls as demonstrated by an
increased mortality rate in a murine infection model. Similarly, S.
marcescens358 and the pathogenic fungi, Aspergillus fumigatus360,
grown on the ISS or in simulated microgravity exhibited enhanced
virulence compared to terrestrial strains and were more lethal in a
Drosophila
and
zebraﬁsh
model,
respectively.
The
speciﬁc
mechanism responsible for increased microbial virulence in space
conditions is still under investigation but genes with altered
expression in-ﬂight may contribute to this virulence response.
These include bioﬁlm-associated genes which were found to be
upregulated in S. typhimurium (e.g., wca/wza genes for colanic
acid synthesis, ompA, ﬁmH) and bacterial motility genes which
were downregulated361. In addition, transcriptional, and proteo-
mic
analysis
of
P.
aeruginosa
identiﬁed
genes
that
were
upregulated in spaceﬂight including virulence- and adhesin-
associated lectin genes (lecA and lecB) and rhlA which is involved
in biosurfactant production355. However, the most common factor
contributing to space-induced virulence seems to be transcrip-
tional regulation by Hfq, the expression of which was shown to be
decreased under both low shear modeled microgravity (LSMMG)
and
spaceﬂight
conditions
in
S.
typhimurium361,362
and
P.
aeruginosa355,363. Hfq is an RNA chaperone and global transcrip-
tional regulator responsible for controlling the expression of a
large array of genes and is necessary for the virulence of several
bacterial pathogens355. Consistent with previous studies, hfq was
found to be downregulated in S. aureus grown in LSMMG,
however, unlike previous studies the virulence potential was
reduced364.
Conversely, some studies have concluded that while micro-
organisms with pathogenic potential are present in these space
environments, spaceﬂight conditions do not lead to increased
virulence or microbial characteristics that would directly impact
crew health365–367. For example, using a macrophage infection
assay, O’Rourke et al. found that there was no signiﬁcant
difference in the virulence of Burkholderia species isolated from
the ISS compared to Earth controls368. In addition, investigation of
four
common
clinical
pathogens,
Listeria
monocytogenes,
methicillin-resistant S. aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, and C. albicans
revealed that they were less virulent in space regarding their
ability to kill Caenorhabditis elegans nematodes369. Similar conclu-
sions were drawn in the ISS experiment EXTREMOPHILES, where
sequencing analysis and physiological tests were performed on
microbial communities from several surfaces aboard the space-
craft370. Researchers proposed that while the ISS environment
selects for bacteria with more natural resistance and tolerance to
extreme conditions, it does not induce genetic or phenotypic
changes that result in more extremophilic, or antibiotic resistant
bacteria compared to a built, enclosed environment on Earth370.
Indeed, a pan-genomic analysis of microbes from the ISS and built
environments on Earth found that the antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) genes present in ISS samples were also present in control
samples, and that functional changes common to built environ-
ments do not have a direct impact on astronaut health371.
Collectively, these studies demonstrate the impact of spaceﬂight
on individual pathogenic microbes in built environments and, for
many, it remains to be determined if the virulence phenotype
depicted in their models will directly translate to mixed bacterial
populations or lead to enhanced pathogenicity in humans.
Therefore,
assessing
the
microbiome
within
the
host
and
continuing to elucidate the mechanism involved in potential
spaceﬂight-enhanced virulence will be necessary. Although there
is some debate regarding the increased pathogenicity of microbial
populations in space, there is evidence of indirect health concerns
caused by harmful bioﬁlm formation370.
Bioﬁlms
Microorganisms in the space environment, as on Earth, can exist in
a planktonic (freely suspended) state, but more commonly form
robust bioﬁlms as a tactic for growth and survival. A bioﬁlm is an
assemblage of surface-associated microbial cells surrounded by an
extracellular matrix of polysaccharides, extracellular DNA (eDNA),
A.P. Koehle et al.
14
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

proteins, lipids, and other components, with a deﬁned architec-
ture372,373. Bioﬁlm-associated organisms differ from their plank-
tonic counterparts with respect to the genes that are transcribed,
proteins that are translated and growth rate372. Although most
bacterial bioﬁlms are harmless, some threaten human health and
safety and can be difﬁcult to eradicate due to increased resistance
to
the
immune
system’s
defenses,
UV
radiation,
extreme
temperatures, pH, high salinity, high pressure, limited nutrients,
and various antimicrobials374,375.
Environmental stressors are known to induce bioﬁlm forma-
tion374 and spaceﬂight is one such stressor. The impact of
microgravity on bioﬁlm formation was investigated for the ﬁrst-
time using P. aeruginosa376, and later during two NASA-funded
studies, Micro-2 and Micro-2A377. In these NASA studies, P.
aeruginosa grown on the ISS displayed different bioﬁlm char-
acteristics compared to ground controls such as an increased
number of viable cells, biomass, and thickness and a novel
column-and-canopy shaped architecture377. However, this novel
architecture was only observed in bioﬁlms formed by motile
bacteria, as non-motile strains produced ﬂat structures similar to
those seen with the ground controls377. In another early bioﬁlm
investigation experiment conducted in space, Burkholderia cepacia
was grown in sterile water, tryptic soy broth (TSB), and an iodine
solution (a disinfectant), for six days on stainless-steel coupons378.
Results showed that bacteria grown in space, in sterile water, had
a bioﬁlm plate count (measured as CFU/m2) ﬁve times larger
compared to ground controls, however, the space grown TSB
population was one quarter of that on Earth378. Those grown in
the iodine solution in space, also had a higher bioﬁlm growth
compared to the ground controls, suggesting increased resistance
to disinfectants during spaceﬂight378. In addition, spaceﬂight
conditions have been demonstrated to upregulate gene expres-
sion for the production of extracellular matrix proteins leading to
enhanced cell aggregation compared to ground controls in C.
albicans361. Differential expression of genes related to motility,
which is important for the formation of bioﬁlms, has also been
observed in ﬂight conditions379.
Bioﬁlms and biodeterioration.
Microbially inﬂuenced corrosion
(MIC), refers to the deterioration of metals and nonmetallic
materials due to microbial activity, most often due to bioﬁlms. As
bioﬁlms increase in quantity more microbial-surface reactions
occur, enhancing structural and/or functional damage, causing
accelerated biocorrosion380.
In a recent Microbial Tracking study (MT-1) of the ISS, the
bacterial bioburden quantiﬁed from various surfaces was as high
as 109 CFU/m2381. Some of the bioﬁlm-forming microorganisms
that were identiﬁed, Methylobacterium, Sphingomonas, Bacillus,
Penicillium, and Aspergillus have been implicated in MIC on
Earth382–385 with Bacillus polymira, Penicillium rubens and Aspergil-
lus sp. responsible for progressive destruction of a navigation
window on board Mir386. Sphingomonas sp. and Methylobacterium
sp. have not only been detected on surfaces but also in portable
drinking water on the ISS387. Over the course of 15 years (from its
launch in 1986 to 2001), 234 species of bacteria and fungi were
identiﬁed onboard the MIR space station, with many exhibiting
potential polymer biodegradation properties388.
Bioﬁlm growth has been observed in the Soviet/Russian (Salyuts
and Mir), American (Skylab), and International (ISS) Space Stations.
Aboard spacecraft, bioﬁlms can jeopardize vital equipment and
threaten astronaut health by corroding surfaces or clogging life-
support systems including air and water puriﬁcation systems,
spacesuits, navigation windows and radiators368,389–392. Most
notable on the ISS, is the microbial contamination and bioﬁlm
formation that occurs in the wastewater tank of the Water
Recovery System (WRS), which is a part of the Environmental
Control and Life Support System (ECLSS) and used to process
wastewater from various sources (i.e., urine, cabin condensate)
into potable water for crew and other functions393. For future
planned missions beyond LEO to the Moon and Mars, resupplying
spare parts or support materials to repair the listed spaceﬂight
systems would be impractical as missions could be in the order of
years, in the case of a Mars missions, thus various strategies to
control bioﬁlms, especially in critical life support systems are
essential394. Ways to detect, monitor and control bioﬁlms are
being explored, such as the current spaceﬂight BAC (Bacterial
Adhesion and Corrosion) study. The aim of this study is to identify
bacterial genes relevant to bioﬁlm growth in space, examine
whether the formed bioﬁlms corrode stainless steel surfaces
mimicking those in the ISS water system, and determine whether
silver-based disinfectants can prevent or control extensive bioﬁlm
formation.
Bioﬁlms and astronaut health.
Bioﬁlm formation is an important
characteristic in the infectious disease process of microorganisms.
It has been demonstrated that bacteria can genetically and
physically modify their tolerances to LEO conditions, with one
such mechanism being bioﬁlm formation395–397. Human opportu-
nistic pathogens that form or increase bioﬁlms under simulated
microgravity conditions or when grown on the ISS include E. coli,
S. typhimurium, P. aeruginosa and Micrococcus luteus379,398. It has
also been observed that many species of bacteria and fungi
become more antibiotic resistant and pathogenic when exposed
or grown in spaceﬂight conditions174. In cases of S. typhimurium17
and P. aeruginosa355, the observed increased virulence (discussed
earlier in this review) was attributed to molecular and phenotypic
changes consistent with bioﬁlm formation. In the case of Klebsiella
pneumoniae grown aboard the Shenzhou VIII spacecraft, the
enhanced antibiotic resistance was associated with adaptations
related to bioﬁlm formation354,399. As bioﬁlm formation can
increase the risk of human illnesses, through harder-to-treat
infections, bioﬁlm properties under space conditions need to be
well understood to enable safe, long-duration, human space
missions. This is even more imperative considering the immune
dysregulation of astronauts and lower efﬁcacy of pharmaceuticals
during spaceﬂight174.
Positive impact of bioﬁlms.
While bioﬁlms can be detrimental to
astronaut health and structural stability, they can be beneﬁcial in
areas such as plant protection, bioremediation, wastewater
treatment, and corrosion inhibition, amongst others400. Thus,
strategies for manipulating bioﬁlms should not focus on complete
eradication, but rather regulation, to promote the growth of
beneﬁcial ones while inhibiting the growth of harmful ones400.
These beneﬁcial applications of bioﬁlms may also be extended to
spaceﬂight. Ichikawa et al. developed a long-term life support
system that uses an electrochemically activated bioﬁlm reactor401.
This system was tested for the removal of nitrate produced from
biological nitriﬁcation and is an important process to allow for
long-term survival of aquatic organisms in a closed system401.
Results from this bioﬁlm-electrode reactor study showed that
neither ammonia nor nitrite accumulated, and nitrate could be
suppressed to about 10 ppm401. Bioﬁlms can also provide insight
into how humans tolerate spaceﬂight. Biological dosimetry is an
internationally approved method to perform an exposure assess-
ment following a suspected radiation overexposure. In contrast to
physical methods, which measure the actual dose, biological
dosimeters measure dose effects, at the cellular level, when
assessing the impact of radiation exposure on humans402. In the
BIODOS project, four DNA-based biological dosimeters (phage T7,
uracil thin layer, spores, and bioﬁlms) were validated for their
effectiveness in determining the biological hazards of environ-
mental UV exposure (i.e., sunlight), and were shown to be reliable
ﬁeld dosimeters403. This same bioﬁlm dosimeter was then used in
a study by Rettberg et al. to determine the biological effectiveness
of the UV radiation climate at different locations in the space
A.P. Koehle et al.
15
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

station, with the aim of ensuring that astronauts had enough UVB
to synthesize vitamin D404. Conclusions from this study showed
that the amount of UV radiation inside the station was not
sufﬁcient for an adequate supply of vitamin D and that specialized
UV lamps were needed to maintain healthy levels of Vitamin D for
astronaut health404. Overall, more work on bioﬁlm applications for
spaceﬂight is needed to tease out the beneﬁts bioﬁlms may offer,
while reducing any harmful properties.
Horizontal gene transfer
The ability for bacteria to survive or even thrive in the spaceﬂight
environment, with potentially increased pathogenicity and bioﬁlm
formation, may be attributed to DNA transfer. Horizontal gene
transfer (HGT), also known as lateral gene transfer, is the
movement of genetic material from one organism to another by
means other than sexual reproduction or vertical transfer from a
parent cell. This typically occurs through one of three main
mechanisms: direct contact of microbial cells by a pilus (i.e.,
conjugation), natural DNA uptake from the environment (i.e.,
transformation), or introduction by bacteriophages (i.e., transduc-
tion)405–407. More recently, gene transfer agents and membrane
vesicles are being recognized for their contributions to HGT as
well408. HGT is central to microbial evolution because it allows
microorganisms to acquire novel genetic material, which may
confer a ﬁtness advantage to adapt to or thrive within a speciﬁc
environment22,409–411.
Prevalence of HGT in the spaceﬂight environment.
In the sealed
spaceﬂight environment, bacteria must adapt to extreme condi-
tions including microgravity and cosmic radiation412, which could
have an impact on the prevalence of genetic transfer. The three
main mechanisms of HGT (transduction, transformation, and
conjugation) were ﬁrst investigated for their occurrence in space
by Ciferri et al. during the Spacelab D1 mission (STS-61-A, 1986)413.
They discovered no signiﬁcant difference in transduction, incon-
clusive transformation results, and increased transmission of
antibiotic resistance genes by conjugation in E. coli exposed to
microgravity413. It was postulated that this increase in conjugation
frequency could be due to a decrease in mating pair disruptions in
microgravity compared to Earth gravity, as continuous cell-to-cell
contact is required for conjugation to occur. Another spaceﬂight
experiment was performed on the Discovery Mission (STS-63)
where researchers concluded that transformation efﬁciency to E.
coli was decreased in microgravity414. Later, during the Soyuz
Mission 8S on the ISS, the Mobilisatsia/Plasmida experiment
examined
plasmid-mediated
conjugation
through
triparental
mating of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria415.
They found that conjugation was increased in experiments
between Bacillus thuringiensis strains (Gram-positive), while no
trends were observed in conjugation experiments from E. coli to C.
metallidurans (Gram-negative)415. This increase in conjugation
efﬁciency could be attributed to the mechanistic differences
between Gram-positive and Gram-negative conjugation, as Gram-
positive bacteria facilitate contact between donor and recipient
cells through surface adhesins rather than conjugative pili416.
However, authors caution the drawing of conclusions due to
failure to obtain transconjugants in some replicates of ground
controls. Conversely, conjugation experiments performed using
the same Gram-positive species (B. thuringiensis) in simulated
microgravity showed that there was no signiﬁcant difference in
plasmid transfer frequency for a plasmid mobilizing itself (cis) or
mobilizing a separate plasmid (trans) compared to standard
laboratory conditions417. Most recently, Urbaniak et al. tracked
HGT of two antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes by co-culturing
of two species, Acinetobacter pittii and S. aureus, isolated from the
ISS as part of the Microbial-1 tracking study381. The results
indicated an approximately 100-fold increase of HGT in simulated
microgravity compared to Earth gravity controls (1-g)418. Com-
bined, these results indicate that HGT occurs in spaceﬂight
conditions within and between Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria and is typically not hampered, and is more often
increased, by spaceﬂight conditions.
HGT and astronaut health.
The human gut houses a diverse
microbial population with ecologically favorable conditions for
HGT given its continuous supply of nutrients and consistent
environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, pH)14. Phylogeny-
based research suggests that over the course of their evolution,
more than half of total genes in the genomes of human-
associated microbiota were introduced by HGT419. While HGT is a
normal occurrence within the human microbiome, an increased
number of transfer events passing AMR genes from commensal
bacteria to opportunistic pathogens during spaceﬂight could
cause changes in these microbial communities175. These transfer
events have been investigated in Staphylococcus epidermidis, a
bacterium normally present in the human epithelial microbiome,
which harbors the methicillin resistance gene mecA on a mobile
genetic element. HGT was found to be an important factor for the
acquisition of mecA by the pathogen S. aureus, leading to
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA)420,421. Recent research has
also demonstrated the transfer of AMR and virulence-associated
genes from commensal E. coli to pathogenic E. coli422. The transfer
of AMR genes can cause increased bacterial resistance and
virulence, which could have signiﬁcant health implications423,424
for astronauts due to their dysregulated immunity on long-
duration space missions425. Numerous studies have shown that
HGT is the common mechanism by which AMR genes are
disseminated within an environment, leading to the emergence
of multi-drug resistant bacteria426–428, which limits treatment
options for bacterial infections.
Some research has proposed that the increased virulence or
pathogenicity observed in some organisms grown under space-
ﬂight conditions is attributed to possible increased HGT in
spaceﬂight conditions357,429,430. In a study comparing similar
species from two extreme built environments, one on Earth
(Concordia Research Station in Antarctica) and one in space (ISS),
it was observed that 76% of the isolates from the ISS were
resistant to one or more antibiotics tested compared to only 44%
of the Concordia isolates429. This increased resistance amongst the
ISS isolates could be attributed to the higher number of mobile
genetic elements
(involved
in HGT)
within
their
genomes
compared to the Antarctic strains429. The reason for this increase
in mobile genetic elements is unclear but it could be a response to
the unique stressors of the space environment. Further, in a study
published by Urbaniak et al. examining the ISS ‘resistome’, whole
genome sequencing revealed AMR gene clusters in Enterobacter
bugandensis isolated from the waste and hygiene compartment
on the ISS. Further examination showed that these isolates shared
AMR gene clusters with known pathogens from different genera
which were not present in any Enterobacter species isolated on
Earth430. The researchers proposed that these AMR genes may
have been acquired through HGT, but further analysis is necessary
to conclude this with certainty. Changes in HGT-associated gene
expression were also identiﬁed in ISS-derived isolates of S.
typhimurium
during
Space
Shuttle
mission
STS-115,
which
exhibited enhanced virulence and increased bioﬁlm formation in
a mouse model compared to the ground control357. The
expression of hfq, an RNA chaperone and negative regulator of
the F plasmid-encoded tra genes, was decreased in spaceﬂight.
TraJ is an activator of the tra operon, and hfq has been shown to
speciﬁcally repress traJ expression by destabilizing its mRNA431. As
a result, several tra genes were upregulated in response to
spaceﬂight357. Mating assays performed in an hfq mutant showed
an increase in protein levels of TraJ conﬁrmed by immunoblotting
as well as increased conjugation efﬁciency compared to wild-type
A.P. Koehle et al.
16
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

controls431. Due to the multiple AMR genes found on the
environmental surfaces of the ISS430 and possible enhanced HGT
activity during spaceﬂight, further studies into HGT and the effect
on crew health are is important to understand for the develop-
ment of mitigation strategies432–434. In addition, further elucida-
tion of differentially expressed genes and their effect on HGT
could identify novel gene targets for modulating or reducing HGT
in the space environment.
HGT and bioﬁlms.
As previously discussed, bioﬁlms can be
detrimental to spacecraft and astronaut health; thus, under-
standing the factors that can inﬂuence bioﬁlm formation will be
imperative for predicting, preventing, and mitigating spacecraft
contamination. HGT may contribute to bioﬁlms as their formation
can be induced by conjugative plasmids that express factors to
enhance cell-to-cell contact and pilus formation. Conjugative pili
can act as adhesion factors as demonstrated by Ghigo who
monitored bioﬁlm formation on Pyrex slides submerged in
cultures of E. coli K12. They observed that strains carrying a
conjugative F plasmid (F+) formed thick bioﬁlms after one day
(2 × 1010 CFU/cm2), while plasmid-free strains (F−) only formed
microcolonies (8 × 105 CFU/cm2)435. Conjugative pili speciﬁcally
were shown to be a contributing factor to bioﬁlm formation as
strains carrying plasmids with mutations in the pilin gene, traA,
were unable to form bioﬁlms435. Reisner et al. conﬁrmed Ghigo’s
ﬁndings as the presence of the F plasmid pOX38 in E. coli led to
the formation of mushroom-shaped bioﬁlms with increased
biomass,
surface
coverage
and
thickness
compared
to
F-
controls436. To further analyze the contribution of the pilus to
this phenotype, the authors created plasmid mutants for several of
the genes required for pilus synthesis: traQ, traX, traD, traS, and
traT 436. Mutants involved in pilus assembly and modiﬁcation (i.e.,
traQ, traX) displayed a weak bioﬁlm phenotype similar to the
plasmid-free strain (traQ) or decreased biomass and thickness
(traX), while those involved in DNA transfer (i.e., traD) displayed
rapid conﬂuent growth and tower-like structures436. In a different
study performed with 403 natural E. coli isolates researchers
observed bioﬁlm formation in 56 isolates and of those, 89%
contained conjugative plasmids437. These recipients of conjuga-
tive plasmids were able to induce bioﬁlms to a greater extent than
their plasmid-free controls437. Finally, one study validated that
conjugative plasmids enhanced bioﬁlm formation but concluded
that this did not directly correlate with conjugation frequency for
all plasmids tested, suggesting other factors may be involved438.
Other
studies
suggest
that
conjugative
plasmid-encoded
ﬁmbriae, bioﬁlm-associated pili, and cell wall-anchoring proteins
can also increase bioﬁlm formation. Type III ﬁmbriae encoded as
accessory proteins on conjugative plasmids have been demon-
strated to mediate cell–cell and cell-surface adhesion439, as well as
increased bioﬁlm formation440 in K. pneumoniae441. Further
evidence of this was demonstrated in a uropathogenic strain of
E. coli where Tn5 mutagenesis was used to identify bioﬁlm-
deﬁcient mutants442. All Tn5 insertions were found to be within
the
type
III
ﬁmbriae
genes
(mrkABCDF)
encoded
on
the
conjugative plasmid pMAS2027. This suggests that type III
ﬁmbriae
were
necessary
for
bioﬁlm
formation
which
was
conﬁrmed when this locus was cloned into bioﬁlm-deﬁcient
mutants and was able to restore bioﬁlm formation442.
When analyzed in a space environment it appears that pili and
ﬁmbriae contribute to increased bioﬁlm formation in the short
term but decreased bioﬁlm formation in the long term. In a
spaceﬂight study, researchers compared bioﬁlm formation of
Acinetobacter schindleri over a short duration (15 days) and long-
duration
(64
days)
from
the
Shenzhou-10
spacecraft
and
Tiangong-2 space lab, respectively443. They observed reduced
bioﬁlm formation after 64 days and following transcriptional
analysis proposed that this reduction was potentially due to
downregulation of the pil and algR genes associated with
conjugative pili and alginate biosynthesis, or upregulation of
genes involved in metal iron binding (as available iron increases
bioﬁlm formation)443. In another study analyzing Proteus mirabilis
bioﬁlm
formation
following
short-term
or
long-term
SMG,
researchers found that long-term exposure resulted in down-
regulation of genes associated with ﬁmbriae, impeding adhesion,
and ultimately decreasing bioﬁlm formation444.
The rate of HGT amongst bacterial communities in bioﬁlms is
increased as it contains a diversity of bacteria, the structured
extracellular matrix (ECM) provides the ideal environment to
stabilize mating pair formation and bacterial contact for genetic
exchange, and eDNA accumulates within the ECM allowing for
natural transformation435,445–447. Lécuyer et al. analyzed the
conjugative transfer of an integrative and conjugative element
(ICE) between B. subtilis strains on normal media compared to
bioﬁlm-inducing media. Results indicated that conjugative transfer
was increased by 100-fold and 10,000-fold on bioﬁlm-inducing
media using minimal media and rich media, respectively446.
Conjugation experiments performed between S. aureus strains
using donors harboring a mobilizable plasmid and the multi-drug
resistant conjugative plasmid, pGO1 yielded similar results448.
Conjugation was performed with standard ﬁlter mating or a
cellulose disk static bioﬁlm model and conjugation frequency in
the bioﬁlm-promoting conditions was found to be ~16,000-fold
higher than in standard conditions448. Overall, HGT promotes
bioﬁlm formation which, in turn, promotes HGT transfer, and both
can contribute to increased bacterial pathogenicity (Fig. 4). If HGT
is increased under space conditions which can consequently lead
to the production of more bioﬁlms, the effect that bioﬁlms have
on spacecraft integrity and function could be even more severe
during long-duration space travel if this feedback loop goes
uninterrupted.
Harnessing HGT as a tool for genetic engineering.
Although HGT
has the potential to negatively impact astronaut health and
jeopardize spacecraft during long-duration space missions, con-
jugation machinery can also be harnessed as a tool for the
development of novel mitigation strategies. Conjugation has been
demonstrated within and between many species of Gram-
negative and Gram-positive bacteria in a laboratory setting, and
from bacteria to eukaryotic cells. Conjugative tool development
for many of these species could have implications for their use in
the space environment including those developed to target
opportunistic pathogens (e.g., Enterococcus, Listeria, Staphylococ-
cus449, Streptomyces450, and S. enterica451), or those that could be
used to engineer useful strains such as probiotic candidates (e.g.,
Bacillus449, Biﬁdobacterium452 and Lactobacillus453) or extremophi-
lic microbes (e.g., D. radiodurans454, yeast455 or algae267,268). When
coupled with CRISPR/Cas technologies conjugation can be used
for the modulation of microbiomes and as a method for targeted
eradication of human pathogens on Earth. This has been
demonstrated
using a
cis- and
trans-
conjugative
plasmid
encoding the I-TevI nuclease domain fused to Streptococcus
pyogenes or S. aureus Cas9 (TevSpCas9 or TevSaCas9) targeting S.
enterica451. This study demonstrated S. enterica killing efﬁciencies
ranging from 1 to 100% following conjugation using 65 single or
multiplexed sgRNAs, allowing for the ability to modulate bacterial
populations based on the chosen sgRNA. Another study using a
similar strategy and a trans-conjugative system has demonstrated
speciﬁc bacterial killing and targeting of a plasmid-born carbape-
nem resistance gene in E. coli456. Other Cas nucleases can be used
to target pathogens as well, including CRISPR/Cas13a-based
antibacterial nucleocapsids, which have been shown to kill
resistant E. coli and S. aureus species by targeting AMR genes457.
CRISPR/Cas technologies can also be used to inhibit conjugation in
human
pathogens458,459,
including
species
that
have
been
isolated from the ISS such as K. pneumonia460, E. faecalis461, and
Staphylococcus462. The biotechnological applications of CRISPR/
A.P. Koehle et al.
17
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

Cas systems in space are extensive, from using Cas proteins to
understand the biological impact of microgravity to detecting the
presence of pathogenic bacteria or viruses, as demonstrated on
Earth using Cas12 or Cas13 for SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection463–465.
The use of CRISPR/Cas systems for these in-space applications is
feasible as genome editing using a CRISPR-based assay has been
performed in S. cerevisiae onboard the ISS466. The mitigation
strategies discussed here will require further testing and adapta-
tion for space which could be carried out in synthetic human gut
microbiomes467 or in simulated spaceﬂight bioﬁlms394. However,
these results indicate that harnessing the power of conjugation
and CRISPR/Cas technologies could provide a promising strategy
for detection of pathogenic bacteria, mitigation of HGT and
modulation
of
human
and
environmental
microbiomes
in
spacecraft.
Mitigation strategies
To minimize the health risks associated with extended spaceﬂight,
it is critical that methods for preventing and treating spaceﬂight-
induced illnesses be developed before astronauts embark upon
long-duration space missions. Speciﬁcally, increased HGT, patho-
genicity and bioﬁlm formation by microorganisms in the space
environment presents the need for highly effective antimicrobials
and targeted solutions for use on spacecraft.
Aside from
traditional antibiotics468, the use of live engineered organisms,
and the use of the conjugation and CRISPR-based strategies
discussed above, other mitigation strategies have been investi-
gated to inhibit HGT and the development of bioﬁlms394. One
well-studied method is antibacterial photodynamic inactivation
employing the use of a photoactive compound which accumu-
lates in target bacteria where it is illuminated to produce a
cytotoxic reaction with oxygen resulting in cellular damage and
bacterial death (reviewed in ref.
469). Additional examples of
mitigation strategies include the use of specialized material
coatings
or
surfaces
(e.g.,
copper-based
antimicrobial
sur-
faces470,471,
silver
and
ruthenium
bio-deterrent
surfaces472),
engineered lantibiotics473, chemical water treatment, UV light,
sound waves, and phenols474. Other promising antimicrobial
materials include AGXX472, which was shown to prevent the
growth of Staphylococcus and Enterococcus pathogens on the ISS,
and sterilization using cold atmospheric plasma441. Some poten-
tial antibioﬁlm coating issues that need to be explored include the
longevity and chemical stability of the coatings475. While several
coatings give extremely promising results in the short term, their
chemical and physical stability may diminish over time476.
Fig. 4
Interplay between bacterial HGT, bioﬁlms, and virulence in space. In microgravity, bacterial HGT can increase cell–cell adhesion, and
production of eDNA and extracellular polysaccharides contributing to increased bioﬁlm formation. Reciprocally, bioﬁlms promote HGT as they
contain high microbial diversity and an ECM structure allowing for increased cell aggregation, stable mating pair formation and eDNA
accumulation. Both HGT and bioﬁlms increase bacterial virulence through cellular adhesion and dissemination of antimicrobial resistance, and
increased biomass and resistance to disinfectants, respectively. Created with BioRender.com.
A.P. Koehle et al.
18
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Regarding long-term space exploration, replenishing these anti-
microbial coatings will prove challenging. The use of plant-based
extracts is thus gaining in popularity for their antimicrobial and
antibioﬁlm properties along with the added beneﬁt of being able
to harvest the necessary compounds during spaceﬂight, as
needed390.
FUTURE OUTLOOK AND SUMMARY
Within the next decade, great strides will be made in space
exploration with the combined efforts of NASA and other space
agencies to reach the Moon and Mars, as well as the expansion of
commercialized spaceﬂight. The Artemis missions will work
towards establishing a lunar base camp by 2025 with the
purpose of utilizing the Moon as a precursor to Mars exploration.
These
missions
will
involve
long-duration
spaceﬂight
and
prolonged extraterrestrial occupation, requiring further explora-
tion of health risks and resource sustainability than what was
needed for the decades spent in LEO on the ISS. This review has
discussed the role of microbes and their beneﬁcial or detrimental
impacts on long-duration space missions as demonstrated in
Earth-based
simulated
space
environments
or
experiments
conducted in spaceﬂight. Microbes heavily contribute to the
success of our ecosystem on Earth and can therefore be
repurposed for the space environment to help generate a
sustainable habitat. We have summarized the advantageous
properties of microbes in plant cultivation, wastewater treatment,
solid and liquid waste reuse, and atmospheric revitalization. This
review has also considered the use of microbial fuel cells to
generate energy from waste, plant decay, and solar light
conversion. Although more research is needed for efﬁcient
energy conversion in the space environment, we present
microbial fuel cells as an ideal and possible future alternative
for energy generation. We also examined the advantages of
bioengineered microbes for in-ﬂight therapeutics, increased
production of nutrients and oxygen, and the creation or recycling
of infrastructure materials. Most of these microbial technologies
have been successfully demonstrated on Earth, but as suggested,
should be further tested, and applied in the space environment.
Microbes are ideal candidates to aid in human survival during
long-term space travel due to their many beneﬁcial character-
istics, ease of manipulation, and microscopic size, allowing them
to be easily stowed without the concern of added weight. In
terms of health and safety risks, the possibility of increased
microbial virulence and pathogenicity in spaceﬂight was dis-
cussed, as well as the detrimental effects of increased HGT and
bioﬁlm formation on astronaut health and equipment integrity.
Suggestions were also made regarding mitigation strategies for
further investigation, including antimicrobial metallic surface
materials and coatings that prevent increased HGT or bioﬁlm
formation. This review has presented the vast contributions that
microbes can make towards future crewed missions, human
habitability and sustainability and hopefully encourages more
space-related microbial research interconnected with technolo-
gical development, to continue to safely advance deep space
exploration in the upcoming decade.
Received: 11 July 2022; Accepted: 25 May 2023;
REFERENCES
1. Loff, S. & Lind, R. Beyond Earth Expanding Human Presence into the Solar
System. https://www.nasa.gov/exploration/home/why_moon.html (2011).
2. Dunbar, B. Artemis. https://www.nasa.gov/what-is-artemis (2021).
3. Artemis
Plan
NASA’s
Lunar
Exploration
Program
Overview.
https://
www.nasa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/atoms/ﬁles/artemis_plan-20200921.pdf (2020).
4. How Investing in the Moon Prepares NASA for First Human Mission to Mars. https://
www.nasa.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/atoms/ﬁles/moon-investments-prepare-us-for-
mars.pdf (2021).
5. Orion Reference Guide. (NASA Johnson Space Center). https://www.nasa.gov/
sites/default/ﬁles/atoms/ﬁles/orion_reference_guide_0.pdf (2022).
6. Mars, K. Gateway. NASA. https://www.nasa.gov/gateway/overview (2023).
7. Atkinson, J. & Spears, S. NASA Seeking BIG Ideas for Solar Power on Mars.
https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/langley/nasa-seeking-big-ideas-for-solar-
power-on-mars (2017).
8. Mars Report: Dust Storms on Mars. https://mars.nasa.gov/resources/26555/mars-
report-dust-storms-on-mars/?site=insight (2022).
9. Kawamoto, H., Uchiyama, M., Cooper, B. L. & McKay, D. S. Mitigation of lunar dust
on solar panels and optical elements utilizing electrostatic traveling-wave. J.
Electrostat. 69, 370–379 (2011).
10. Stubbs, T. J. et al. On the role of dust in the lunar ionosphere. Planet Space Sci.
59, 1659–1664 (2011).
11. NASA Mars 2020 Mission Perseverance Rover Cruise. https://mars.nasa.gov/
mars2020/timeline/cruise/.
12. NASA
Mars 2020 Mission
Perseverance Rover Communications.
https://
mars.nasa.gov/mars2020/spacecraft/rover/communications/.
13. Gilbert, J. A. et al. Current understanding of the human microbiome. Nat. Med.
24, 392–400 (2018).
14. Cho, I. & Blaser, M. J. The human microbiome: at the interface of health and
disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 13, 260–270 (2012).
15. Pickard, J. M., Zeng, M. Y., Caruso, R. & Núñez, G. Gut microbiota: role in
pathogen colonization, immune responses, and inﬂammatory disease. Immunol.
Rev. 279, 70–89 (2017).
16. LeBlanc, J. G. et al. Bacteria as vitamin suppliers to their host: a gut microbiota
perspective. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 24, 160–168 (2013).
17. Batista, B. D. & Singh, B. K. Realities and hopes in the application of microbial
tools in agriculture. Micro. Biotechnol. 14, 1258–1268 (2021).
18. Abhilash, P. C., Dubey, R. K., Tripathi, V., Gupta, V. K. & Singh, H. B. Plant growth-
promoting microorganisms for environmental sustainability. Trends Biotechnol.
34, 847–850 (2016).
19. dos Santos Lopes, M. J., Dias-Filho, M. B. & Gurgel, E. S. C. Successful plant
growth-promoting microbes: inoculation methods and abiotic factors. Front.
Sustain. Food Syst. 5, (2021).
20. Caplice, E. Food fermentations: role of microorganisms in food production and
preservation. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 50, 131–149 (1999).
21. Thompson, L. R. et al. A communal catalogue reveals Earth’s multiscale microbial
diversity. Nature 551, 457–463 (2017).
22. Webster, N. S. & Reusch, T. B. H. Microbial contributions to the persistence of
coral reefs. ISME J. 11, 2167–2174 (2017).
23. Gougoulias, C., Clark, J. M. & Shaw, L. J. The role of soil microbes in the global
carbon cycle: tracking the below-ground microbial processing of plant-derived
carbon for manipulating carbon dynamics in agricultural systems. J. Sci. Food
Agric. 94, 2362–2371 (2014).
24. van der Heijden, M. G. A., Bardgett, R. D. & van Straalen, N. M. The unseen
majority: soil microbes as drivers of plant diversity and productivity in terrestrial
ecosystems. Ecol. Lett. 11, 296–310 (2008).
25. Barberán, A. The microbial contribution to macroecology. Front. Microbiol. 5, 203
(2014).
26. Horve, P. F. et al. Building upon current knowledge and techniques of indoor
microbiology to construct the next era of theory into microorganisms, health,
and the built environment. J. Exposure Sci. Amp. Environ. Epidemiol. 30, 219–235
(2019).
27. Lax, S. et al. Bacterial colonization and succession in a newly opened hospital.
Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6500 (2017).
28. Drake, B. G., Hoffman, S. J. & Beaty, D. W. Human exploration of Mars, Design
Reference Architecture 5.0. in 2010 IEEE Aerospace Conference (IEEE, 2010).
https://doi.org/10.1109/aero.2010.5446736.
29. Microbiologist, A. J. The BioHome: A spinoff of space technology. NASA,
Washington, Biological Life Support Technologies: Commercial Opportunities (1990).
30. Salisbury, F. B., Gitelson, J. I. & Lisovsky, G. M. Bios-3: Siberian experiments in
bioregenerative life support. Bioscience 47, 575–585 (1997).
31. Walker, J. & Granjou, C. MELiSSA the minimal biosphere: human life, waste and
refuge in deep space. Futures 92, 59–69 (2017).
32. Fu, Y. et al. How to establish a bioregenerative life support system for long-term
crewed missions to the moon or mars. Astrobiology 16, 925–936 (2016).
33. Arena, C. et al. Suitability of Solanum lycopersicum L. ‘Microtom’ for growth in
Bioregenerative Life Support Systems: exploring the effect of high-scpLET/
scpionising radiation on photosynthesis, leaf structure and fruit traits. Plant Biol.
21, 615–626 (2019).
34. Desiderio, A. et al. Effects of simulated space radiations on the tomato root
proteome. Front. Plant Sci. 10, 1334 (2019).
A.P. Koehle et al.
19
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

35. Zhang, J. et al. Competitive growth assay of mutagenized Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii compatible with the international space station veggie plant growth
chamber. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 631 (2020).
36. Barker, R., Lombardino, J., Rasmussen, K. & Gilroy, S. Test of Arabidopsis space
transcriptome: a discovery environment to explore multiple plant biology
spaceﬂight experiments. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 147 (2020).
37. Heiney, A. Growing Plants in Space. (2019).
38. Massa, G. D. et al. VEG-01: Veggie hardware validation testing on the interna-
tional space station. Open Agric. 2, 33–41 (2017).
39. Hummerick, M. E. et al. Spatial characterization of microbial communities on
multi-species leafy greens grown simultaneously in the vegetable production
systems on the international space station. Life 11, 1060 (2021).
40. Jarvis, W. R. Managing diseases is greenhouse crops. Plant Dis. 73, 190 (1989).
41. Bishop, D. L., Levine, H. G., Kropp, B. R. & Anderson, A. J. Seedborne fungal
contamination: consequences in space-grown wheat. Phytopathology 87,
1125–1133 (1997).
42. Ryba-White, M. et al. Growth in microgravity increases susceptibility of soybean
to a fungal pathogen. Plant Cell Physiol. 42, 657–664 (2001).
43. Schuerger, A. C. et al. Fusarium oxysporum as an Opportunistic Fungal Pathogen
on Zinnia hybrida Plants Grown on board the International Space Station.
Astrobiology 21, 1029–1048 (2021).
44. Urbaniak, C. et al. Draft Genome Sequences of Two Fusarium oxysporum Iso-
lates Cultured from Infected Zinnia hybrida Plants Grown on the International
Space Station. Genome Announc. 6, e00326–18 (2018).
45. Zaets, I. et al. Bioaugmentation in growing plants for lunar bases. Adv. Space Res.
47, 1071–1078 (2011).
46. Wamelink, G. W. W., Frissel, J. Y., Krijnen, W. H. J., Verwoert, M. R. & Goedhart, P.
W. Can plants grow on Mars and the Moon: a growth experiment on Mars and
Moon soil simulants. PLoS ONE 9, e103138 (2014).
47. Paul, A. L., Elardo, S. M. & Ferl, R. Plants grown in Apollo lunar regolith present
stress-associated transcriptomes that inform prospects for lunar exploration.
Commun. Biol. 5, 1–9 (2022).
48. Kozyrovska, N. O. et al. Growing pioneer plants for a lunar base. Adv. Space Res.
37, 93–99 (2006).
49. Ferl, R. J. & Paul, A. L. Lunar plant biology-a review of the Apollo era. Astrobiology
10, 261–274 (2010).
50. Brack, A. & Pillinger, C. T. Life on Mars: chemical arguments and clues from
Martian meteorites. Extremophiles 2, 313–319 (1998).
51. Parnell, J. Extraction of organic signatures from carbonates and evaporites: from
mineral deposits to Mars. Proc. Geologists Assoc. 116, 281–291 (2005).
52. Müller, O. Solar wind nitrogen and indigenous nitrogen in lunar material. Phys.
Chem. Earth 11, 47–59 (1979).
53. Palomba, E. et al. Evidence for Mg-rich carbonates on Mars from a 3.9m
absorption feature. Icarus 203, 58–65 (2009).
54. Leshin, L. A. et al. Volatile, isotope, and organic analysis of Martian ﬁnes with the
Mars curiosity rover. Science 341, 1238937 (2013).
55. Mylona, P., Pawlowski, K. & Bisseling, T. Symbiotic nitrogen ﬁxation. Plant Cell 7,
869 (1995).
56. Harris, F., Dobbs, J., Atkins, D., Ippolito, J. A. & Stewart, J. E. Soil fertility inter-
actions with Sinorhizobium-legume symbiosis in a simulated Martian regolith
effects on nitrogen content and plant health. PLoS ONE 16, e0257053 (2021).
57. Ralphs, M., Franz, B., Baker, T. & Howe, S. Water extraction on Mars for an
expanding human colony. Life Sci. Space Res. 7, 57–60 (2015).
58. Maggi, F. & Pallud, C. Martian base agriculture: The effect of low gravity on water
ﬂow, nutrient cycles, and microbial biomass dynamics. Adv. Space Res. 46,
1257–1265 (2010).
59. Sher, Y. et al. Microbial extracellular polysaccharide production and aggregate
stability controlled by switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) root biomass and soil
water potential. Soil Biol. Biochem. 143, 107742 (2020).
60. Nascimento, Mdo et al. Prospects of using biomass of N2-ﬁxing cyanobacteria as
an organic fertilizer and soil conditioner. Algal Res. 43, 101652 (2019).
61. Abinandan, S., Subashchandrabose, S. R., Venkateswarlu, K. & Megharaj, M. Soil
microalgae and cyanobacteria: the biotechnological potential in the main-
tenance of soil fertility and health. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 39, 981–998 (2019).
62. Li, C. et al. Characteristics of the lunar samples returned by the Chang’E-5
mission. Natl. Sci. Rev. 9, (2022).
63. Singh, J. & Kalamdhad, A. Effects of heavy metals on soil, plants, human health
and aquatic life. Int. J. Res. Chem. Environ. 1, (2011).
64. Abbas, S. Z. & Rafatullah, M. Recent advances in soil microbial fuel cells for soil
contaminants remediation. Chemosphere 272, 129691 (2021).
65. Ayangbenro, A. S. & Babalola, O. O. A new strategy for heavy metal polluted
environments: a review of microbial biosorbents. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
14, 94 (2017).
66. Wu, C. et al. Immobilization of microbes on biochar for water and soil reme-
diation: a review. Environ. Res. 212, 113226 (2022).
67. Huang, M. S., Pan, J. & Zheng, L. P. Removal of heavy metals from aqueous
solutions using bacteria. J. Shanghai Univ. 5, 253–259 (2001).
68. González Henao, S. & Ghneim-Herrera, T. Heavy metals in soils and the reme-
diation potential of bacteria associated with the plant microbiome. Front.
Environ. Sci. 9, (2021).
69. Yetunde Mutiat, F.-B., Gbolahan, B. & Olu, O. A comparative study of the wild
and mutatedheavy metal resistant Klebsiella variicola generated for cadmium
bioremediation. Bioremediat. J. 22, 1–15 (2018).
70. Oze, C. et al. Perchlorate and agriculture on Mars. Soil Syst. 5, 37 (2021).
71. Eichler, A. et al. Challenging the agricultural viability of martian regolith simu-
lants. Icarus 354, 114022 (2021).
72. Wang, X. et al. Microbial electrochemistry for bioremediation. Environ. Sci. Eco-
technol. 1, 100013 (2020).
73. Sarria, M., Gonzales, J. M., Gerrity, D. & Batista, J. Biological reduction of nitrate
and perchlorate in soil microcosms: an electron donor comparison of glycerol,
emulsiﬁed oil, and mulch extract. Groundw. Monit. Remediation 39, 32–42 (2018).
74. Misra, G., Smith, W., Garner, M. & Loureiro, R. Potential biological remediation
strategies for removing perchlorate from Martian regolith. N. Space 9, 217–227
(2021).
75. Sunilkumar, U. & LAL, S. Perchlorate reducing bacteria and their insight towards
astrobiology. Int. J. Res. Anal. Rev. 8, (2021).
76. Ewert, M. K. et al. Advanced Life Support Requirements, Assumptions and
Reference Missions. in SAE Technical Paper Series (SAE International, 2002).
https://doi.org/10.4271/2002-01-2480.
77. Liu, H., Yao, Z., Fu, Y. & Feng, J. Review of research into bioregenerative life
support system(s) which can support humans living in space. Life Sci. Space Res.
31, 113–120 (2021).
78. Garland, J. Coupling plant growth and waste recycling systems in a controlled
life support system (CELSS). NTRS, (1992).
79. Tang, Y. et al. Design and establishment of a large-scale controlled ecological
life-support system integrated experimental platform. Life Sci. Space Res. 31,
121–130 (2021).
80. Xie, B. et al. The water treatment and recycling in 105-day bioregenerative life
support experiment in the Lunar Palace 1. Acta Astronaut. 140, 420–426 (2017).
81. Tikhomirov, A. A. et al. Assessment of the possibility of establishing material
cycling in an experimental model of the bio-technical life support system with
plant and human wastes included in mass exchange. Acta Astronaut. 68,
1548–1554 (2011).
82. He, W., Liu, H., Xing, Y. & Jones, S. B. Comparison of three soil-like substrate
production techniques for a bioregenerative life support system. Adv. Space Res.
46, 1156–1161 (2010).
83. Yu, C. et al. Bioconversion of rice straw into a soil-like substrate. Acta Astronaut.
63, 1037–1042 (2008).
84. Hendrickx, L. et al. Microbial ecology of the closed artiﬁcial ecosystem MELiSSA
(Micro-Ecological Life Support System Alternative): reinventing and compart-
mentalizing the Earths food and oxygen regeneration system for long-haul
space exploration missions. Res. Microbiol. 157, 77–86 (2006).
85. Zhu, G. et al. Research on the hydrolysis of human urine using biological acti-
vated carbon and its application in bioregenerative life support system. Acta
Astronaut. 155, 191–199 (2019).
86. Putnam, D. F. Composition and concentrative properties of human urine. National
Aeronautics and Space Administration Contractor Report. Huntington Beach,
California: McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company - Western Division. (1971).
87. Maggi, F., Tang, F. H. M., Pallud, C. & Gu, C. A urine-fuelled soil-based bior-
egenerative life support system for long-term and long-distance manned space
missions. Life Sci. Space Res. 17, 1–14 (2018).
88. Subbarao, G., Yorio, N., Wheeler, R. & Stutte, G. Plant Growth and Human Life
Support for Space Travel. In Handbook of Plant and Crop Physiology (CRC Press,
2001). https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203908426.ch48.
89. Garland, J. L., Levine, L. H., Yorio, N. C. & Hummerick, M. E. Response of gray-
water recycling systems based on hydroponic plant growth to three classes of
surfactants. Water Res. 38, 1952–1962 (2004).
90. Garland, J. Graywater processing in recirculating hydroponic systems: phyto-
toxicity, surfactant degradation, and bacterial dynamics. Water Res. 34,
3075–3086 (2000).
91. Horneck, G. et al. Humex, a study on the survivability and adaptation of humans
to long-duration exploratory missions, part I: Lunar missions. Adv. Space Res. 31,
2389–2401 (2003).
92. Rosgaard, L., de Porcellinis, A. J., Jacobsen, J. H., Frigaard, N.-U. & Sakuragi, Y.
Bioengineering of carbon ﬁxation, biofuels, and biochemicals in cyanobacteria
and plants. J. Biotechnol. 162, 134–147 (2012).
93. Zahra, Z., Choo, D. H., Lee, H. & Parveen, A. Cyanobacteria: review of current
potentials and applications. Environments 7, 13 (2020).
94. Rasmussen, B., Fletcher, I. R., Brocks, J. J. & Kilburn, M. R. Reassessing the ﬁrst
appearance of eukaryotes and cyanobacteria. Nature 455, 1101–1104 (2008).
A.P. Koehle et al.
20
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

95. Gan, F. & Bryant, D. A. Adaptive and acclimative responses of cyanobacteria to
far-red light. Environ. Microbiol. 17, 3450–3465 (2015).
96. Gan, F. et al. Extensive remodeling of a cyanobacterial photosynthetic apparatus
in far-red light. Science 345, 1312–1317 (2014).
97. Gisriel, C. J. et al. Structure of a photosystem I-ferredoxin complex from a marine
cyanobacterium provides insights into far-red light photoacclimation. J. Biol.
Chem. 298, 101408 (2022).
98. Rabbow, E. et al. EXPOSE-R2: The Astrobiological ESA Mission on Board of the
International Space Station. Front. Microbiol. 8, 1533 (2017).
99. Rabbow, E. et al. EXPOSE, an astrobiological exposure facility on the interna-
tional space station - from proposal to ﬂight. Orig. Life Evol. Biospheres 39,
581–598 (2009).
100. Billi, D. et al. A desert cyanobacterium under simulated Mars-like conditions in
low earth orbit: implications for the habitability of Mars. Astrobiology 19,
158–169 (2019).
101. Fleming, E. D., Bebout, B. M., Tan, M. X., Selch, F. & Ricco, A. J. Biological system
development for GraviSat: A new platform for studying photosynthesis and
microalgae in space. Life Sci. Space Res. 3, 63–75 (2014).
102. Gòdia, F. et al. MELISSA: a loop of interconnected bioreactors to develop life
support in Space. J. Biotechnol. 99, 319–330 (2002).
103. Poughon, L., Creuly, C., Godia, F., Leys, N. & Dussap, C.-G. Photobioreactor
Limnospira indica growth model: application from the MELiSSA plant pilot scale
to ISS ﬂight experiment. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8, (2021).
104. Detrell, G. Chlorella vulgaris photobioreactor for oxygen and food production
on a Moon basepotential and challenges. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8, (2021).
105. Häder, D. On the way to Mars ﬂagellated algae in bioregenerative life support
systems under microgravity conditions. Front. Plant Sci. 10, 1621 (2020).
106. Sachdeva, N. et al. Ground demonstration of the use of limnospira indica for air
revitalization in a bioregenerative life-support system setup: effect of non-
nitriﬁed urinederived nitrogen sources. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8, (2021).
107. Poughon, L. et al. Limnospira indica PCC8005 growth in photobioreactor: model
and simulation of the ISS and ground experiments. Life Sci. Space Res. 25, 53–65
(2020).
108. Kyazze, G. Four ways microbial fuel cells might revolutionise electricity pro-
duction in the future. The Conversation https://theconversation.com/four-ways-
microbial-fuel-cells-might-revolutionise-electricity-production-in-the-future-
152184 (2020).
109. Logan, B. E. Microbial Fuel Cells. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007).
110. Arkatkar, A., Mungray, A. K. & Sharma, P. Study of electrochemical activity zone
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in microbial fuel cell. Process Biochem. 101, 213–217
(2021).
111. Lin, T. et al. Synthetic Saccharomyces cerevisiae - Shewanella oneidensis con-
sortium enables glucose-fed high-performance microbial fuel cell. AIChE J. 63,
1830–1838 (2016).
112. Kondaveeti, S., Lee, S.-H., Park, H.-D. & Min, B. Speciﬁc enrichment of different
Geobacter sp. in anode bioﬁlm by varying interspatial distance of electrodes in
air-cathode microbial fuel cell (MFC). Electrochim. Acta 331, 135388 (2020).
113. Vasyliv, O. M., Maslovska, O. D., Ferensovych, Y. P., Bilyy, O. I. & Hnatush, S. O.
Interconnection between tricarboxylic acid cycle and energy generation in
microbial fuel cell performed by desulfuromonas acetoxidans IMV B-7384. in
Energy Harvesting and Storage: Materials, Devices, and Applications VI (eds. Dhar,
N. K. & Dutta, A. K.) (SPIE, 2015).
114. Ren, H., Tian, H., Gardner, C. L., Ren, T.-L. & Chae, J. A miniaturized microbial fuel
cell with three-dimensional graphene macroporous scaffold anode demon-
strating a record power density of over 100.167em000 W msup-3/sup. Nanos-
cale 8, 3539–3547 (2016).
115. Trapero, J. R., Horcajada, L., Linares, J. J. & Lobato, J. Is microbial fuel cell
technology ready? An economic answer towards industrial commercialization.
Appl. Energy 185, 698–707 (2017).
116. Potter, M. C. Electrical effects accompanying the decomposition of organic
compounds. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Series B, Containing Papers of a Biological Char-
acter 84, 260–276 (1911).
117. Zhang, J. et al. Life cycle assessment of osmotic microbial fuel cells for simul-
taneous wastewater treatment and resource recovery. Int J. Life Cycle Assess. 24,
1962–1975 (2019).
118. Cao, X., Song, H., Yu, C. & Li, X. Simultaneous degradation of toxic refractory
organic pesticide and bioelectricity generation using a soil microbial fuel cell.
Bioresour. Technol. 189, 87–93 (2015).
119. Bose, D., Santra, M., Sanka, R. V. S. P. & Krishnakumar, B. Bioremediation analysis
of sediment microbial fuel cells for energy recovery from microbial activity in
soil. Int. J. Energy Res. 45, 6436–6445 (2020).
120. Ieropoulos, I., Greenman, J. & Melhuish, C. Improved energy output levels from
small-scale microbial fuel cells. Bioelectrochemistry 78, 44–50 (2010).
121. Linares, R. V. et al. Scale up of microbial fuel cell stack system for residential
wastewater treatment in continuous mode operation. Water 11, 217 (2019).
122. de Vet, S. J. & Rutgers, R. From waste to energy: First experimental bacterial fuel
cells onboard the international space station. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 19,
225–229 (2007).
123. Electriﬁed Bacteria Clean Wastewater, Generate Power | NASA Spinoff. https://
spinoff.nasa.gov/Spinoff2019/ee_1.html.
124. Cid, C. A., Stinchcombe, A., Ieropoulos, I. & Hoffmann, M. R. Urine microbial fuel
cells in a semi-controlled environment for onsite urine pre-treatment and
electricity production. J. Power Sources 400, 441–448 (2018).
125. Lu, S. et al. Resource recovery microbial fuel cells for urine-containing waste-
water treatment without external energy consumption. Chem. Eng. J. 373,
1072–1080 (2019).
126. Yang, N., Liu, H., Jin, X., Li, D. & Zhan, G. One-pot degradation of urine waste-
water by combining simultaneous halophilic nitriﬁcation and aerobic deni-
triﬁcation in air-exposed biocathode microbial fuel cells (AEB-MFCs). Sci. Total
Environ. 748, 141379 (2020).
127. Ieropoulos, I., Greenman, J. & Melhuish, C. Urine utilisation by microbial fuel cells
energy fuel for the future. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14, 94–98 (2012).
128. Cao, X. et al. A new method for water desalination using microbial desalination.
Cells Environ. Sci. Amp Technol. 43, 7148–7152 (2009).
129. Fangzhou, D., Zhenglong, L., Shaoqiang, Y., Beizhen, X. & Hong, L. Electricity
generation directly using human feces wastewater for life support system. Acta
Astronaut. 68, 1537–1547 (2011).
130. Colombo, A. et al. Signal trends of microbial fuel cells fed with different food-
industry residues. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 42, 1841–1852 (2017).
131. Gajda, I. et al. Miniaturized ceramic-based microbial fuel cell for efﬁcient power
generation from urine and stack development. Front. Energy Res. 6, 84 (2018).
132. Gajda, I., Obata, O., Salar-Garcia, M. J., Greenman, J. & Ieropoulos, I. A. Long-term
bio-power of ceramic microbial fuel cells in individual and stacked conﬁgura-
tions. Bioelectrochemistry 133, 107459 (2020).
133. Ieropoulos, I. A. et al. Pee power urinal microbial fuel cell technology ﬁeld trials
in the context of sanitation. Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Amp. Technol. 2, 336–343
(2016).
134. Jones, D. L., Nguyen, C. & Finlay, R. D. Carbon ﬂow in the rhizosphere: carbon
trading at the soilroot interface. Plant Soil 321, 5–33 (2009).
135. Schamphelaire, Lde et al. Microbial fuel cells generating electricity from rhizo-
deposits of rice. Plants Environ. Sci. Amp. Technol. 42, 3053–3058 (2008).
136. Lee, R. & Miller, A. A novel approach to harvesting energy from agriculture in
microbe-polluted water: the implementation of plant microbial fuel cells in
hydroponic chambers. Columbia Junior Sci. J. (2018).
137. Habibul, N., Hu, Y. & Sheng, G. P. Microbial fuel cell driving electrokinetic
remediation of toxic metal contaminated soils. J. Hazard Mater. 318, 9–14
(2016).
138. Bradley, R. W., Bombelli, P., Lea-Smith, D. J. & Howe, C. J. Terminal oxidase
mutants of the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 show increased
electrogenic activity in biological photo-voltaic systems. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
15, 13611 (2013).
139. MeiRong, M., LiMin, C., XiaoFang, Y. & ZongWu, D. Study on the performance of
photosynthetic microbial fuel cells powered by synechocystis PCC-6803.
Kezaisheng Nengyuan / Renew. Energy Resour. 30, 42–46 (2012).
140. Wenzel, T., Härtter, D., Bombelli, P., Howe, C. J. & Steiner, U. Porous translucent
electrodes enhance current generation from photosynthetic bioﬁlms. Nat.
Commun. 9, 1299 (2018).
141. Dawar, S., Behera, B. K. & Mohanty, P. Development of a low-cost oxy-hydrogen
bio-fuel cell for generation of electricity using Nostoc as a source of hydrogen.
Int. J. Energy Res. 22, 1019–1028 (1998).
142. Güttler, J. et al. Direct electron transport as a possible mechanism of electro-
genic activity across a range of benthic cyanobacteria in a photosynthetic
microbial fuel cell. N. Z. J. Bot. 58, 378–388 (2020).
143. Pisciotta, J. M., Zou, Y. & Baskakov, I. V. Role of the photosynthetic electron
transfer chain in electrogenic activity of cyanobacteria. Appl. Microbiol. Bio-
technol. 91, 377–385 (2011).
144. Oluyide, O. O. et al. Effect of some operational conditions on bioelectricity
production in algal fuel cell. Int. J. Renew. Energy Technol. 11, 70 (2020).
145. Maity, J. P. et al. The production of biofuel and bioelectricity associated with
wastewater treatment by green algae. Energy 78, 94–103 (2014).
146. Kaushik, S., Sarma, M. K. & Goswami, P. FRET-guided surging of cyanobacterial
photosystems improves and stabilizes current in photosynthetic microbial fuel
cell. J. Mater. Chem. A Mater. 5, 7885–7895 (2017).
147. Wall, M. Nuclear Reactor for Mars Outpost Could Be Ready to Fly by 2022 |
Space.
Space.com
https://www.space.com/nuclear-reactor-for-mars-outpost-
2022.html (2019).
148. Voutsinos, M. Biomining the elements of the future. The Conversation https://
theconversation.com/biomining-the-elements-of-the-future-87621 (2018).
149. Olson, G. J., Sakai, C. K., Parks, E. J. & Brinckman, F. E. Bioleaching of cobalt from
smelter wastes by Thiobacillus ferrooxidans. J. Ind. Microbiol. 6, 49–52 (1990).
A.P. Koehle et al.
21
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

150. Giaveno, A., Lavalle, L., Chiacchiarini, P. & Donati, E. Bioleaching of zinc from low-
grade complex sulﬁde ores in an airlift by isolated Leptospirillum ferrooxidans.
Hydrometallurgy 89, 117–126 (2007).
151. Clark, D. A. & Norris, P. R. Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans gen. nov., sp. nov.: mixed-
culture ferrous iron oxidation with Sulfobacillus species. Microbiol. (N. Y) 142,
785–790 (1996).
152. Rawlings, D. E. Characteristics and adaptability of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing
microorganisms used for the recovery of metals from minerals and their con-
centrates. Micro. Cell Fact. 4, 13 (2005).
153. Solisio, C., Lodi, A. & Veglio, F. Bioleaching of zinc and aluminium from industrial
waste sludges by means of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans. Waste Manag. 22,
667–675 (2002).
154. Pronk, J. T. & Johnson, D. B. Oxidation and reduction of iron by acidophilic
bacteria. Geomicrobiol. J. 10, 153–171 (1992).
155. Deveci, H., Akcil, A. & Alp, I. Bioleaching of complex zinc sulphides using
mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria: comparative importance of pH and iron.
Hydrometallurgy 73, 293–303 (2004).
156. McSween, H. Y., Taylor, G. J. & Wyatt, M. B. Elemental composition of the martian
crust. Science 324, 736–739 (2009).
157. Ruzicka, A., Snyder, G. A. & Taylor, L. A. Comparative geochemistry of basalts
from the moon, earth, HED asteroid, and Mars: implications for the origin of the
moon. Geochim Cosmochim. Acta 65, 979–997 (2001).
158. Doody, D. Deep Space Craft (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009).
159. Loudon, C.-M. et al. BioRock: new experiments and hardware to investigate
microbemineral interactions in space. Int. J. Astrobiol. 17, 303–313 (2017).
160. Cockell, C. S. et al. Space station biomining experiment demonstrates rare earth
element extraction in microgravity and Mars gravity. Nat. Commun. 11, 5523 (2020).
161. Cockell, C. S. et al. Microbially-enhanced vanadium mining and bioremediation
under micro- and Mars gravity on the international space station. Front.
Microbiol. 12 (2021).
162. Yin, S., Wang, L., Wu, A., Free, M. L. & Kabwe, E. Enhancement of copper recovery
by acid leaching of high-mud copper oxides: a case study at Yangla Copper
Mine, China. J. Clean. Prod. 202, 321–331 (2018).
163. Cook, R. T. Methane heat transfer investigation. Contractor Report. https://
ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19850004010 (1984).
164. Harbaugh, J. NASA 3-D Prints First Full-Scale Copper Rocket Engine Part. (2015).
165. Sonter, M. J. The technical and economic feasibility of mining the near-earth
asteroids. Acta Astronaut. 41, 637–647 (1997).
166. Busch, M. Proﬁtable asteroid mining. JBIS 57, 301–305 (2004).
167. Kryzanowski, T. & Mardon, A. Mining potential of asteriod belt. Can. Min. J. 111,
(1990).
168. Levin, G. v, Kuznetz, L. & Laﬂeur, A. L. Approaches to resolving the question of
life on Mars. in SPIE Proceedings (ed. Hoover, R. B.) (SPIE, 2000). https://doi.org/
10.1117/12.411620.
169. Chakarvarty, U. Renewable Energy Materials Supply Implications. Association for
Energy Economics, Energy Forum 37 (2018).
170. Goonan, T. G. Rare earth elements: end use and recyclability. https://doi.org/
10.3133/sir20115094 (2011).
171. Rawlings, D. E. & Johnson, D. B. Biomining. Biomining (Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg, 2007).
172. Volger, R. et al. Theoretical bioreactor design to perform microbial mining
activities on mars. Acta Astronaut. 170, 354–364 (2020).
173. Khalil, A. S. & Collins, J. J. Synthetic biology: applications come of age. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 11, 367–379 (2010).
174. Tesei, D., Jewczynko, A., Lynch, A. & Urbaniak, C. Understanding the complexities
and changes of the astronaut microbiome for successful long-duration space
missions. Life 12, 495 (2022).
175. Voorhies, A. A. et al. Study of the impact of long-duration space missions at the
International Space Station on the astronaut microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 9911 (2019).
176. Baevsky, R. M. et al. Autonomic cardiovascular and respiratory control during
prolonged spaceﬂights aboard the International Space Station. J. Appl Physiol.
103, 156–161 (2007).
177. Parsons-Wingerter, P., Hosamani, R., Vickerman, M. B. & Bhattacharya, S. Map-
ping by VESGEN of wing vein phenotype in Drosophila for quantifying adap-
tations to space environments. Gravit. Space Res. 3, 54–64 (2015).
178. Voorhies, A. A. & Lorenzi, H. A. The challenge of maintaining a healthy micro-
biome during long-duration space missions. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 3, (2016).
179. Crucian, B. & Sams, C. Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight: clinical
risk for exploration-class missions. J. Leukoc. Biol. 86, 1017–1018 (2009).
180. Turroni, S. et al. Gut microbiome and space travelers’ health: state of the art and
possible pro/prebiotic strategies for long-term space missions. Front. Physiol. 11,
553929 (2020).
181. Douglas, G. L. & Voorhies, A. A. Evidence based selection of probiotic strains to
promote astronaut health or alleviate symptoms of illness on long duration
spaceﬂight missions. Benef. Microbes 8, 727–737 (2017).
182. Islam, S. U. Clinical uses of probiotics. Medicine 95, e2658 (2016).
183. Ritchie, L. E. et al. Space environmental factor impacts upon murine colon
microbiota and mucosal homeostasis. PLoS ONE 10, e0125792 (2015).
184. Smirnov, K. V. & Lizko, N. N. Problems of space gastroenterology and micro-
environment. Food / Nahr. 31, 563–566 (1987).
185. Shao, D. et al. Simulated microgravity affects some biological characteristics of
Lactobacillus acidophilus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 101, 3439–3449 (2016).
186. Sakai, T. et al. Probiotics into outer space: feasibility assessments of encapsu-
lated freeze-dried probiotics during 1 month’s storage on the International
Space Station. Sci. Rep. 8, 10687 (2018).
187. Fajardo-Cavazos, P. & Nicholson, W. L. Shelf life and simulated gastrointestinal
tract survival of selected commercial probiotics during a simulated round-trip
journey to Mars. Front. Microbiol. 12, 748950 (2021).
188. Simon, Á., Smarandache, A., Iancu, V. & Pascu, M. L. Stability of antimicrobial
drug molecules in different gravitational and radiation conditions in view of
applications during outer space missions. Molecules 26, 2221 (2021).
189. Soga, S. et al. Stereospeciﬁc antitumor activity of radicicol oxime derivatives.
Cancer Chemother. Pharm. 48, 435–445 (2001).
190. Lam, K. S. et al. The effects of space ﬂight on the production of monorden by
Humicola fuscoatra WC5157 in solid-state fermentation. Appl. Microbiol. Bio-
technol. 49, 579–583 (1998).
191. Lam, K. S. et al. The effect of space ﬂight on the production of actinomycin D by
Streptomyces plicatus. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 29, 299–302 (2002).
192. Benoit, M. R. et al. Microbial antibiotic production aboard the International
Space Station. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 70, 403–411 (2006).
193. Schei, K. et al. Early gut mycobiota and mother-offspring transfer. Microbiome 5,
107 (2017).
194. Angulo, M., Reyes-Becerril, M., Medina-Córdova, N., Tovar-Ramirez, D. & Angulo,
C. Probiotic and nutritional effects of Debaryomyces hansenii on animals. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 104, 7689–7699 (2020).
195. Zeng, A. et al. Effects of Debaryomyces hansenii treatment on intestinal mucosa
microecology in mice with antibiotic-associated diarrhea. PLoS ONE 14,
e0224730 (2019).
196. Wu, Y., Tang, Y., Xiao, N.-Q., Wang, C.-H. & Tan, Z.-J. Bacterial lactase gene
characteristics in intestinal contents of antibiotic-associated diarrhea mice
treated with Debaryomyces hansenii. Med. Sci. Monit. 26, e920879 (2020).
197. He, Y. et al. Inﬂuence of Debaryomyces hansenii on bacterial lactase gene
diversity in intestinal mucosa of mice with antibiotic-associated diarrhea. PLoS
ONE 14, e0225802 (2019).
198. Rizzatti, G., Lopetuso, L. R., Gibiino, G., Binda, C. & Gasbarrini, A. Proteobacteria: a
common factor in human diseases. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 1–7 (2017).
199. Urbaniak, C. et al. The inﬂuence of spaceﬂight on the astronaut salivary
microbiome and the search for a microbiome biomarker for viral reactivation.
Microbiome 8, 56 (2020).
200. Claesen, J. & Fischbach, M. A. Synthetic microbes as drug delivery systems. ACS
Synth. Biol. 4, 358–364 (2014).
201. Aggarwal, N., Breedon, A. M. E., Davis, C. M., Hwang, I. Y. & Chang, M. W.
Engineering probiotics for therapeutic applications: recent examples and
translational outlook. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 65, 171–179 (2020).
202. Zhou, Z. et al. Engineering probiotics as living diagnostics and therapeutics for
improving human health. Micro. Cell Fact. 19, 56 (2020).
203. Piñero-Lambea, C., Ruano-Gallego, D. & Fernández, L. Á. Engineered bacteria as
therapeutic agents. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 35, 94–102 (2015).
204. O’Toole, P. W., Marchesi, J. R. & Hill, C. Next-generation probiotics: the spectrum
from probiotics to live biotherapeutics. Nat. Microbiol. 2, 17057 (2017).
205. Garrido, V. et al. Engineering a genome-reduced bacterium to eliminate Sta-
phylococcus aureus bioﬁlms in vivo. Mol. Syst. Biol. 17, e10145 (2021).
206. Neil, K. et al. High-efﬁciency delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 by engineered probiotics
enables precise microbiome editing. Mol. Syst. Biol. 17, e10335 (2021).
207. Strucko, T., Andersen, N. L., Mahler, M. R., Martinez, J. L. & Mortensen, U. H. A
CRISPR/Cas9 method facilitates efﬁcient oligo-mediated gene editing in
Debaryomyces hansenii. Synth. Biol. 6, ysab031 (2021).
208. Banjara, N., Nickerson, K. W., Suhr, M. J. & Hallen-Adams, H. E. Killer toxin from
several food-derived Debaryomyces hansenii strains effective against patho-
genic Candida yeasts. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 222, 23–29 (2016).
209. Al-Qaysi, S. A. S., Al-Haideri, H., Thabit, Z. A., Al-Kubaisy, W. H. A. A.-R. & Ibrahim, J.
A. A.-R. Production, characterization, and antimicrobial activity of mycocin pro-
duced by Debaryomyces hanseni DSMZ70238. Int. J. Microbiol. 2017, 1–9 (2017).
210. Hwang, I. Y. et al. Reprogramming microbes to be pathogen-seeking killers. ACS
Synth. Biol. 3, 228–237 (2013).
211. Saeidi, N. et al. Engineering microbes to sense and eradicate Pseudomonas
aeruginosa a human pathogen. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 521 (2011).
212. Hwang, I. Y. et al. Engineered probiotic Escherichia coli can eliminate and pre-
vent Pseudomonas aeruginosa gut infection in animal models. Nat. Commun. 8,
15028 (2017).
A.P. Koehle et al.
22
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

213. Geldart, K. G. et al. Engineered scp E. coli scp Nissle 1917 for the reduction of
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus in the intestinal tract. Bioeng. Amp Transl.
Med. 3, 197–208 (2018).
214. Tscherner, M., Giessen, T. W., Markey, L., Kumamoto, C. A. & Silver, P. A. A
synthetic system that senses Candida albicans and inhibits virulence factors
https://doi.org/10.1101/342287 (2018).
215. Plavec, T. V. et al. Engineered Lactococcus lactis secreting IL-23 receptor-tar-
geted REX protein blockers for modulation of IL-23/Th17-mediated inﬂamma-
tion. Microorganisms 7, 152 (2019).
216. Lubkowicz, D. et al. Reprogramming probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri as a biosensor
for Staphylococcus aureus derived AIP-I detection. ACS Synth. Biol. 7, 1229–1237
(2018).
217. McFarland, L. V., Evans, C. T. & Goldstein, E. J. C. Strain-speciﬁcity and disease-
speciﬁcity of probiotic efﬁcacy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front
Med (Lausanne) 5, 124 (2018).
218. Scott, B. M. et al. Self-tunable engineered yeast probiotics for the treatment of
inﬂammatory bowel disease. Nat. Med. 27, 1212–1222 (2021).
219. Archer, E. J., Robinson, A. B. & Süel, G. M. Engineered E. coli that detect and
respond to gut inﬂammation through nitric oxide sensing. ACS Synth. Biol. 1,
451–457 (2012).
220. Daefﬂer, K. N.-M. et al. Engineering bacterial thiosulfate and tetrathionate sen-
sors for detecting gut inﬂammation. Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 923 (2017).
221. Kotula, J. W. et al. Programmable bacteria detect and record an environmental
signal in the mammalian gut. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 4838–4843 (2014).
222. Çiftçioǧlu, N., Haddad, R. S., Golden, D. C., Morrison, D. R. & McKay, D. S. A
potential cause for kidney stone formation during space ﬂights: enhanced
growth of nanobacteria in microgravity. Kidney Int. 67, 483–491 (2005).
223. Whitson, P., Pietrzyk, R., Jones, J. & Sams, C. Renal stone assessment during
spaceﬂight - Assessment and countermeausure validation. in 2001 Conference
and Exhibit on International Space Station Utilization (American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2001).
224. Pietrzyk, R., Jones, J., Sams, C. & Whitson, P. Renal stone formation among
astronauts - PubMed. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 78, (2007).
225. Siener, R. et al. The role of Oxalobacter formigenes colonization in calcium
oxalate stone disease. Kidney Int. 83, 1144–1149 (2013).
226. Al, K. F. et al. Oxalate-degrading Bacillus subtilis mitigates urolithiasis in a
Drosophila melanogaster model. mSphere 5, e00498–20 (2020).
227. Grujic, D. et al. Hyperoxaluria is reduced and nephrocalcinosis prevented with
an oxalate-degrading enzyme in mice with hyperoxaluria. Am. J. Nephrol. 29,
86–93 (2008).
228. Sasikumar, P. et al. Recombinant Lactobacillus plantarum expressing and
secreting heterologous oxalate decarboxylase prevents renal calcium oxalate
stone deposition in experimental rats. J. Biomed. Sci. 21, 86 (2014).
229. Ettinger, G., MacDonald, K., Reid, G. & Burton, J. P. The inﬂuence of the human
microbiome and probiotics on cardiovascular health. Gut Microbes 5, 719–728
(2014).
230. Gan, X. T. et al. Probiotic administration attenuates myocardial hypertrophy and
heart failure after myocardial infarction in the rat. Circ. Heart Fail 7, 491–499 (2014).
231. Naruszewicz, M., Johansson, M.-L., Zapolska-Downar, D. & Bukowska, H. Effect of
Lactobacillus plantarum 299v on cardiovascular disease risk factors in smokers.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 76, 1249–1255 (2002).
232. Chen, Z. et al. Incorporation of therapeutically modiﬁed bacteria into gut
microbiota inhibits obesity. J. Clin. Invest. 124, 3391–3406 (2014).
233. Hughson, R. L., Helm, A. & Durante, M. Heart in space: effect of the extra-
terrestrial environment on the cardiovascular system. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 15,
167–180 (2017).
234. Meerman, M. et al. Myocardial disease and long-distance space travel: solving
the radiation problem. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 8, 631985 (2021).
235. Trolio, R., di, Lorenzo, G., di, Fumo, B. & Ascierto, P. A. Cosmic radiation and
cancer: is there a link? Future Oncol. 11, 1123–1135 (2015).
236. Durante, M. & Cucinotta, F. A. Heavy ion carcinogenesis and human space
exploration. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 465–472 (2008).
237. Edmondson, E. F. et al. Genomic mapping in outbred mice reveals overlap in
genetic susceptibility for HZE ion and -rayinduced tumors. Sci. Adv. 6, eaax5940
(2020).
238. Zhou, S., Gravekamp, C., Bermudes, D. & Liu, K. Tumour-targeting bacteria
engineered to ﬁght cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 18, 727–743 (2018).
239. Zhu, H. et al. Antitumor effect of sFlt-1 gene therapy system mediated by
Biﬁdobacterium Infantis on Lewis lung cancer in mice. Cancer Gene Ther. 18,
884–896 (2011).
240. Piñero-Lambea, C. et al. Programming controlled adhesion of E. coli to target
surfaces, cells, and tumors with synthetic adhesins. ACS Synth. Biol. 4, 463–473
(2014).
241. Chowdhury, S. et al. Programmable bacteria induce durable tumor regression
and systemic antitumor immunity. Nat. Med. 25, 1057–1063 (2019).
242. Yang, H. et al. Genetically engineered bacterial protein nanoparticles for tar-
geted cancer therapy. Int. J. Nanomed. 16, 105–117 (2021).
243. Agrawal, N. et al. Bacteriolytic therapy can generate a potent immune response
against experimental tumors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 15172–15177 (2004).
244. Feng, X. et al. Novel insights into the role of Clostridium novyi-NT related
combination bacteriolytic therapy in solid tumors (Review). Oncol. Lett. 21, 110
(2020).
245. Badie, F. et al. Use of Salmonella bacteria in cancer therapy: direct, drug delivery
and combination approaches. Front. Oncol. 11, 624759 (2021).
246. Wang, Y., Chen, J., Tang, B. O., Zhang, X. & Hua, Z.-C. Systemic administration of
attenuated Salmonella typhimurium in combination with interleukin-21 for
cancer therapy. Mol. Clin. Oncol. 1, 461–465 (2013).
247. Yoon, W., Yoo, Y., Chae, Y. S., Kee, S.-H. & Kim, B. M. Therapeutic advantage of
genetically engineered Salmonella typhimurium carrying short hairpin RNA against
inhibin alpha subunit in cancer treatment. Ann. Oncol. 29, 2010–2017 (2018).
248. Toso, J. F. et al. Phase I study of the intravenous administration of attenuated
Salmonella typhimurium to patients with metastatic melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol.
20, 142–152 (2002).
249. Nemunaitis, J. et al. Pilot trial of genetically modiﬁed, attenuated Salmonella
expressing the E. coli cytosine deaminase gene in refractory cancer patients.
Cancer Gene Ther. 10, 737–744 (2003).
250. Maletzki, C., Linnebacher, M., Kreikemeyer, B. & Emmrich, J. Pancreatic cancer
regression by intratumoural injection of live Streptococcus pyogenes in a syn-
geneic mouse model. Gut 57, 483–491 (2007).
251. Danino, T. et al. Programmable probiotics for detection of cancer in urine. Sci.
Transl. Med. 7, 289ra84 (2015).
252. Alvarez, A. L., Weyers, S. L., Goemann, H. M., Peyton, B. M. & Gardner, R. D.
Microalgae, soil and plants: a critical review of microalgae as renewable
resources for agriculture. Algal Res. 54, 102200 (2021).
253. Torres-Tiji, Y., Fields, F. J. & Mayﬁeld, S. P. Microalgae as a future food source.
Biotechnol. Adv. 41, 107536 (2020).
254. Olsson-Francis, K. & Cockell, C. S. Use of cyanobacteria for in-situ resource use in
space applications. Planet Space Sci. 58, 1279–1285 (2010).
255. Brown, M. Curious Kids: Where does the oxygen come from in the International
Space Station, and why don’t they run out of air? The Conversation https://
theconversation.com/curious-kids-where-does-the-oxygen-come-from-in-the-
international-space-station-and-why-dont-they-run-out-of-air-82910 (2017).
256. Berepiki, A., Hitchcock, A., Moore, C. M. & Bibby, T. S. Tapping the unused
potential of photosynthesis with a heterologous electron sink. ACS Synth. Biol. 5,
1369–1375 (2016).
257. Santos-Merino, M. et al. Improved photosynthetic capacity and photosystem I
oxidation via heterologous metabolism engineering in cyanobacteria. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2021523118 (2021).
258. Kamennaya, N. A. et al. Installing extra bicarbonate transporters in the cyano-
bacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 enhances biomass production. Metab.
Eng. 29, 76–85 (2015).
259. Sakai, M., Ogawa, T., Matsuoka, M. & Fukuda, H. Photosynthetic conversion of
carbon dioxide to ethylene by the recombinant cyanobacterium, Synecho-
coccus sp. PCC 7942, which harbors a gene for the ethylene-forming enzyme of
Pseudomonas syringae. J. Ferment. Bioeng. 84, 434–443 (1997).
260. Lindberg, P., Park, S. & Melis, A. Engineering a platform for photosynthetic
isoprene production in cyanobacteria, using Synechocystis as the model
organism. Metab. Eng. 12, 70–79 (2010).
261. Atsumi, S., Higashide, W. & Liao, J. C. Direct photosynthetic recycling of carbon
dioxide to isobutyraldehyde. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 1177–1180 (2009).
262. Deng, M.-D. & Coleman, J. R. Ethanol synthesis by genetic engineering in cya-
nobacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 523–528 (1999).
263. Dogutan, D. K. & Nocera, D. G. Artiﬁcial photosynthesis at efﬁciencies greatly
exceeding that of natural photosynthesis. Acc. Chem. Res. 52, 3143–3148 (2019).
264. Wells, M. L. et al. Algae as nutritional and functional food sources: revisiting our
understanding. J. Appl. Phycol. 29, 949–982 (2016).
265. Becker, E. W. Micro-algae as a source of protein. Biotechnol. Adv. 25, 207–210
(2007).
266. Kroth, P. G. et al. Genome editing in diatoms: achievements and goals. Plant Cell
Rep. 37, 1401–1408 (2018).
267. Slattery, S. S. et al. Plasmid-based complementation of large deletions in
Phaeodactylum tricornutum biosynthetic genes generated by Cas9 editing. Sci.
Rep. 10, 13879 (2020).
268. Karas, B. J. et al. Designer diatom episomes delivered by bacterial conjugation.
Nat. Commun. 6, 6925 (2015).
269. Gale, G. A. R. et al. Emerging species and genome editing tools: future prospects
in Cyanobacterial Synthetic Biology. Microorganisms 7, 409 (2019).
270. Serif, M. et al. One-step generation of multiple gene knock-outs in the diatom
Phaeodactylum tricornutum by DNA-free genome editing. Nat. Commun. 9,
3924 (2018).
A.P. Koehle et al.
23
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

271. Behler, J., Vijay, D., Hess, W. R. & Akhtar, M. K. CRISPR-based technologies for
metabolic engineering in cyanobacteria. Trends Biotechnol. 36, 996–1010 (2018).
272. Cochrane, R. R. et al. Rapid method for generating designer algal mitochondrial
genomes. Algal Res. 50, 102014 (2020).
273. Slattery, S. S. et al. An expanded plasmid-based genetic toolbox enables Cas9
genome editing and stable maintenance of synthetic pathways in Phaeo-
dactylum tricornutum. ACS Synth. Biol. 7, 328–338 (2018).
274. Koo, K. M. et al. The mechanism of starch over-accumulation in Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii high-starch mutants identiﬁed by comparative transcriptome ana-
lysis. Front. Microbiol. 8, 858 (2017).
275. Baek, K. et al. Photoautotrophic production of macular pigment in a Chlamy-
domonas reinhardtii strain generated by using DNA-free CRISPR-Cas9 RNP-
mediated mutagenesis. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 115, 719–728 (2017).
276. Lee, A. G. et al. Spaceﬂight associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS) and the
neuro-ophthalmologic effects of microgravity: a review and an update. npj
Microgravity 6, 1–10 (2020).
277. Hindupur, A. et al. BioNutrients-1: On-Demand Production of Nutrients in Space.
NASA government report. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20190033398 (2019).
278. Durante, M. & Cucinotta, F. A. Physical basis of radiation protection in space
travel. Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1245–1281 (2011).
279. Ball, N. et al. BioNutrients-2: Improvements to the BioNutrients-1 Nutrient Pro-
duction System. 50th International Conference on Environmental Systems, (2021).
280. Snyder, J. E., Walsh, D., Carr, P. A. & Rothschild, L. J. A makerspace for life support
systems in space. Trends Biotechnol. 37, 1164–1174 (2019).
281. KISTLER, S. S. Coherent expanded aerogels and jellies. Nature 127, 741 (1931).
282. Paulauskiene, T., Uebe, J. & Ziogas, M. Cellulose aerogel composites as oil sor-
bents and their regeneration. PeerJ 9, e11795 (2021).
283. Soleimani Dorcheh, A. & Abbasi, M. H. Silica aerogel; synthesis, properties and
characterization. J. Mater. Process. Tech. 1–3, 10–26 (2008).
284. Wordsworth, R., Kerber, L. & Cockell, C. Enabling Martian habitability with silica
aerogel via the solid-state greenhouse effect. Nat. Astron 3, 898–903 (2019).
285. Zhao, S. et al. Additive manufacturing of silica aerogels. Nature 584, 387–392
(2020).
286. Jones, S. M. & Sakamoto, J. Applications of Aerogels in Space Exploration. in
Aerogels Handbook 721–746 (Springer New York, 2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4419-7589-8_32.
287. Yang, Y. et al. Toughness of spider silk at high and low temperatures. Adv. Mater.
17, 84–88 (2005).
288. Bowen, C. H. et al. Seeded chain-growth polymerization of proteins in living
bacterial cells. ACS Synth. Biol. 8, 2651–2658 (2019).
289. Voigt, C. A. Synthetic biology 20202030: six commercially-available products
that are changing our world. Nat. Commun. 11, 6379 (2020).
290. Roberts, A. D. et al. Synthetic biology for ﬁbers, adhesives, and active camou-
ﬂage materials in protection and aerospace. MRS Commun. 9, 486–504 (2019).
291. Kim, E. et al. A biosynthetic hybrid spidroin-amyloid-mussel foot protein for
underwater adhesion on diverse surfaces. ACS Appl Mater. Interfaces 13,
48457–48468 (2021).
292. Dubbin, K. et al. Projection microstereolithographic microbial bioprinting for
engineered bioﬁlms. Nano Lett. 21, 1352–1359 (2021).
293. Di Martino, P. Extracellular polymeric substances, a key element in under-
standing bioﬁlm phenotype. AIMS Microbiol. 4, 274–288 (2018).
294. Akiyama, H. et al. Antibiotics-free stable polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) production
from carbon dioxide by recombinant cyanobacteria. Bioresour. Technol. 102,
11039–11042 (2011).
295. Osanai, T. et al. Increased bioplastic production with an RNA polymerase sigma
factor SigE during nitrogen starvation in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. DNA Res.
20, 525–535 (2013).
296. Sudesh, K., Taguchi, K. & Doi, Y. Effect of increased PHA synthase activity on
polyhydroxyalkanoates biosynthesis in Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Int J. Biol.
Macromol. 30, 97–104 (2002).
297. Averesch, N. J. H. & Rothschild, L. J. Metabolic engineering of Bacillus subtilis for
production of para-aminobenzoic acid unexpected importance of carbon
source is an advantage for space application. Micro. Biotechnol. 12, 703–714
(2019).
298. Averesch, N. J. H., Winter, G. & Krömer, J. O. Production of para-aminobenzoic
acid from different carbon-sources in engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Micro. Cell Fact. 15, 89 (2016).
299. Prater, T. et al. 3D Printing in Zero G Technology Demonstration Mission:
complete experimental results and summary of related material modeling
efforts. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 101, 391–417 (2018).
300. Gu, J.-D. Microbiological deterioration and degradation of synthetic polymeric
materials: recent research advances. Int. Biodeterior. Amp. Biodegrad. 52, 69–91
(2003).
301. Tesei, D. Black fungi research: out-of-this-world implications. Encyclopedia 2,
212–229 (2022).
302. Webb, J. S. et al. Fungal colonization and biodeterioration of plasticized poly-
vinyl chloride. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66, 3194–3200 (2000).
303. Tesei, D. et al. Shotgun proteomics reveals putative polyesterases in the secre-
tome of the rock-inhabiting fungus Knuﬁa chersonesos. Sci. Rep. 10, 9770 (2020).
304. Tesei, D. et al. Effects of simulated microgravity on the proteome and secretome
of the polyextremotolerant black fungus Knuﬁa chersonesos. Front. Genet. 12,
638708 (2021).
305. Dadachova, E. & Casadevall, A. Ionizing radiation: how fungi cope, adapt, and
exploit with the help of melanin. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 11, 525–531 (2008).
306. Blachowicz, A. et al. Proteomic and metabolomic characteristics of extremo-
philic fungi under simulated mars conditions. Front. Microbiol. 10, 1013 (2019).
307. Zakharova, K., Marzban, G., de Vera, J.-P., Lorek, A. & Sterﬂinger, K. Protein
patterns of black fungi under simulated Mars-like conditions. Sci. Rep. 4, 5114
(2014).
308. Atanasova, N., Stoitsova, S., Paunova-Krasteva, T. & Kambourova, M. Plastic
degradation by extremophilic bacteria. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 5610 (2021).
309. Reisz, J. A., Bansal, N., Qian, J., Zhao, W. & Furdui, C. M. Effects of ionizing
radiation on biological molecules mechanisms of damage and emerging
methods of detection. Antioxid. Amp. Redox Signal. 21, 260–292 (2014).
310. Azzam, E. I., Jay-Gerin, J.-P. & Pain, D. Ionizing radiation-induced metabolic
oxidative stress and prolonged cell injury. Cancer Lett. 327, 48–60 (2012).
311. Cucinotta, F. A., Kim, M.-H. Y., Willingham, V. & George, K. A. Physical and bio-
logical organ dosimetry analysis for international space station astronauts.
Radiat. Res. 170, 127–138 (2008).
312. American Nuclear Society -- ANS. https://www.ans.org/.
313. Naito, M. et al. Radiation dose and its protection in the Moon from galactic
cosmic rays and solar energetic particles: at the lunar surface and in a lava tube.
J. Radiol. Prot. 40, 947–961 (2020).
314. Mendell, W. Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century. (1985).
315. Aziz, Md. A. B., Rahman, Md. F. & Prodhan, Md. M. H. Comparison of lead, copper
and aluminium as gamma radiation shielding material through experimental
measurements and simulation using MCNP version 4c. Int. J. Contemp. Res. Rev.
9, 20193–20206 (2018).
316. Zhdanova, N. N., Tugay, T., Dighton, J., Zheltonozhsky, V. & Mcdermott, P.
Ionizing radiation attracts soil fungi. Mycol. Res. 108, 1089–1096 (2004).
317. Vember, V. V. & Zhdanova, N. N. Peculiarities of linear growth of the melanin-
containing fungi Cladosporium sphaerospermum Penz. and Alternaria alternata
(Fr.) Keissler. Mikrobiol. Z. 63, 3–12 (2001).
318. Dadachova, E. et al. Ionizing radiation changes the electronic properties of
melanin and enhances the growth of melanized fungi. PLoS ONE 2, e457 (2007).
319. Dadachova, E. et al. The radioprotective properties of fungal melanin are a
function of its chemical composition, stable radical presence and spatial
arrangement. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 21, 192–199 (2008).
320. Cordero, R. J. B. Melanin for space travel radioprotection. Environ. Microbiol. 19,
2529–2532 (2017).
321. Robinson, C. H. Cold adaptation in Arctic and Antarctic fungi. New Phytol. 151,
341–353 (2001).
322. Dadachova, E. et al. The radioprotective properties of fungal melanin are a
function of its chemical composition, stable radical presence and spatial
arrangement. Pigment Cell Amp. Melanoma Res. 21, 192–199 (2007).
323. Eisenman, H. C. et al. Microstructure of cell wall-associated melanin in the
human
pathogenic
fungus
Cryptococcus
neoformans.
Biochemistry
44,
3683–3693 (2005).
324. Schultzhaus, Z. et al. The response of the melanized yeast Exophiala dermatitidis
to gamma radiation exposure. Environ. Microbiol. 22, 1310–1326 (2020).
325. Wong, H. J., Mohamad-Fauzi, N., Rizman-Idid, M., Convey, P. & Alias, S. A. Pro-
tective mechanisms and responses of micro-fungi towards ultraviolet-induced
cellular damage. Polar Sci. 20, 19–34 (2019).
326. Romsdahl, J., Blachowicz, A., Chiang, Y.-M., Venkateswaran, K. & Wang, C. C. C.
Metabolomic analysis of Aspergillus niger isolated from the International Space
Station reveals enhanced production levels of the antioxidant Pyranonigrin A.
Front. Microbiol. 11, 931 (2020).
327. Malo, M. E. et al. Transcriptomic and genomic changes associated with radio-
adaptation in Exophiala dermatitidis. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 19, 196–205
(2021).
328. Cortesão, M. et al. MARSBOx: fungal and bacterial endurance from a balloon-
ﬂown analog mission in the stratosphere. Front. Microbiol. 12, 601713 (2021).
329. Zhdanova, N. et al. Tropism of soil micromycetes under the inﬂuence of ionizing
radiation. Mikologiya I Fitopatologiya 28, (1994).
330. Averesch, N. J. H., Shunk, G. K. & Kern, C. Cultivation of the Dematiaceous
Fungus Cladosporium sphaerospermum Aboard the International Space Station
and Effects of Ionizing Radiation. Front. Microbiol. 13, 877625 (2022).
331. Almpani-Lekka, D., Pfeiffer, S., Schmidts, C. & Seo, S. A review on architecture
with fungal biomaterials: the desired and the feasible. Fungal Biol. Biotechnol. 8,
17 (2021).
A.P. Koehle et al.
24
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

332. Cerimi, K., Akkaya, K. C., Pohl, C., Schmidt, B. & Neubauer, P. Fungi as source for
new bio-based materials: a patent review. Fungal Biol. Biotechnol. 6, 17 (2019).
333. Yang, L., Park, D. & Qin, Z. Material function of mycelium-based bio-composite: a
review. Front. Mater. 8, 374 (2021).
334. Haneef, M. et al. Advanced materials from fungal mycelium: fabrication and
tuning of physical properties. Sci. Rep. 7, 41292 (2017).
335. Ziegler, A. R., Bajwa, S. G., Holt, G. A., McIntyre, G. & Bajwa, D. S. Evaluation of
physico-mechanical properties of mycelium reinforced green biocomposites
made from cellulosic ﬁbers. Appl. Eng. Agric. 32, 931–938 (2016).
336. Sun, W., Tajvidi, M., Hunt, C. G., McIntyre, G. & Gardner, D. J. Fully bio-based
hybrid composites made of wood, fungal mycelium and cellulose nanoﬁbrils.
Sci. Rep. 9, 3766 (2019).
337. Lim, S. et al. Identiﬁcation of the pigment and its role in UV resistance in
Paecilomyces variotii, a Chernobyl isolate, using genetic manipulation strate-
gies. Fungal Genet. Biol. 152, 103567 (2021).
338. Roberts, A. D. et al. Blood, sweat, and tears: extraterrestrial regolith bio-
composites with in vivo binders. Mater. Today Bio 12, 100136 (2021).
339. Sharma, A. & Chaudhuri, T. K. Revisiting Escherichia coli as microbial factory for
enhanced production of human serum albumin. Micro. Cell Fact. 16, 173 (2017).
340. Roberts, A. D. et al. Non-covalent protein-based adhesives for transparent
substrates bovine serum albumin vs. recombinant spider silk. Mater. Today Bio 7,
100068 (2020).
341. Mujah, D., Shahin, M. A. & Cheng, L. State-of-the-art review of biocementation
by microbially induced calcite precipitation (MICP) for soil stabilization. Geo-
microbiol. J. 34, 524–537 (2016).
342. Bang, S. S., Galinat, J. K. & Ramakrishnan, V. Calcite precipitation induced by
polyurethane-immobilized Bacillus pasteurii. Enzym. Micro. Technol. 28, 404–409
(2001).
343. Stocks-Fischer, S., Galinat, J. K. & Bang, S. S. Microbiological precipitation of
CaCO3. Soil Biol. Biochem. 31, 1563–1571 (1999).
344. Rahbar, N. Extending the life of self-healing structural. Mater. Matter 2, 289–291
(2020).
345. Zhu, T., Paulo, C., Merroun, M. L. & Dittrich, M. Potential application of biomi-
neralization by Synechococcus PCC8806 for concrete restoration. Ecol. Eng. 82,
459–468 (2015).
346. M, K. S. et al. Evaluation of crack healing potential of cement mortar incorpo-
rated with blue-green microalgae. J. Build. Eng. 44, 102958 (2021).
347. Seifan, M., Samani, A. K. & Berenjian, A. Induced calcium carbonate precipitation
using Bacillus species. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100, 9895–9906 (2016).
348. Mondal, S., Das, P. & Datta, P. Deinococcus radiodurans: a novel bacterium for
crack remediation of concrete with special applicability to low-temperature
conditions. Cem. Concr. Compos 108, 103523 (2020). & Ghosh, A. (Dey).
349. Ramachandran, S. K., Ramakrishnan, V. & Bang, S. S. Remediation of Concrete
Using Microorganisms. ACI Mater. J. 98, 3–9 (2001).
350. Jonkers, H. M., Thijssen, A., Muyzer, G., Copuroglu, O. & Schlangen, E. Application
of bacteria as self-healing agent for the development of sustainable concrete.
Ecol. Eng. 36, 230–235 (2010).
351. Barabesi, C. et al. Bacillus subtilis gene cluster involved in calcium carbonate
biomineralization. J. Bacteriol. 189, 228–235 (2007).
352. Heveran, C. M. et al. Biomineralization and successive regeneration of engi-
neered living building materials. Matter 2, 481–494 (2020).
353. Qiu, J. et al. Engineering living building materials for enhanced bacterial viability
and mechanical properties. iScience 24, 102083 (2021).
354. Li, J. et al. Genomic and transcriptomic analysis of NDM-1 Klebsiella pneumoniae
in spaceﬂight reveal mechanisms underlying environmental adaptability. Sci.
Rep. 4, 6216 (2014).
355. Crabbé, A. et al. Transcriptional and proteomic responses of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PAO1 to spaceﬂight conditions involve Hfq regulation and reveal a
role for oxygen. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 1221–1230 (2011).
356. Nickerson, C. A. et al. Microgravity as a novel environmental signal affecting
Salmonella
enterica
serovar
typhimurium
virulence.
Infect.
Immun.
68,
3147–3152 (2000).
357. Wilson, J. W. et al. Space ﬂight alters bacterial gene expression and virulence
and reveals a role for global regulator Hfq. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104,
16299–16304 (2007).
358. Gilbert, R. et al. Spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity conditions increase
virulence of Serratia marcescens in the Drosophila melanogaster infection
model. NPJ Microgravity 6, 4 (2020).
359. Chopra, V. et al. Alterations in the virulence potential of enteric pathogens and
bacterial host cell interactions under simulated microgravity conditions. J.
Toxicol. Environ. Health A 69, 1345–1370 (2006).
360. Knox, B. P. et al. Characterization of Aspergillus fumigatus isolates from air and
surfaces of the international space station. mSphere 1, (2016).
361. Crabbé, A. et al. Spaceﬂight enhances cell aggregation and random budding in
Candida albicans. PLoS ONE 8, e80677 (2013).
362. Wilson, J. W. et al. Microarray analysis identiﬁes Salmonella genes belonging to
the low-shear modeled microgravity regulon. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99,
13807–13812 (2002).
363. Crabbé, A. et al. Response of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 to low shear
modelled microgravity involves AlgU regulation. Environ. Microbiol. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02184.x (2010).
364. Castro, S. L., Nelman-Gonzalez, M., Nickerson, C. A. & Ott, C. M. Induction of
attachment-independent bioﬁlm formation and repression of hfq expression by
low-ﬂuid-shear culture of Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77,
6368–6378 (2011).
365. Lawal, A., Jejelowo, O. A. & Rosenzweig, J. A. The effects of low-shear mechanical
stress on yersinia pestis virulence. Astrobiology 10, 881–888 (2010).
366. Rosado, H., Doyle, M., Hinds, J. & Taylor, P. W. Low-shear modelled microgravity
alters expression of virulence determinants of Staphylococcus aureus. Acta
Astronaut. 66, 408–413 (2010).
367. Timmery, S., Hu, X. & Mahillon, J. Characterization of bacilli isolated from the
conﬁned environments of the Antarctic Concordia Station and the International
Space Station. Astrobiology 11, 323–334 (2011).
368. O’Rourke, A., Lee, M. D., Nierman, W. C., Everroad, R. C. & Dupont, C. L. Genomic
and phenotypic characterization of Burkholderia isolates from the potable water
system of the International Space Station. PLoS ONE 15, e0227152 (2020).
369. Hammond, T. G. et al. Effects of microgravity on the virulence of Listeria
monocytogenes, Enterococcus faecalis, Candida albicans, and methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Astrobiology 13, 1081–1090 (2013).
370. Mora, M. et al. Space Station conditions are selective but do not alter microbial
characteristics relevant to human health. Nat. Commun. 10, (2019).
371. Blaustein, R. A. et al. Pangenomic approach to understanding microbial adap-
tations within a model built environment, the International Space Station,
relative to human hosts and soil. mSystems 4, e00281–18 (2019).
372. Donlan, R. M. Bioﬁlms: microbial life on surfaces. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 8, 881–890
(2002).
373. Reffuveille, F., Josse, J., Vallé, Q., Mongaret, C. & Gangloff, S. C. Staphylococcus
aureus Bioﬁlms and their Impact on the Medical Field. In The Rise of Virulence
and Antibiotic Resistance in Staphylococcus aureus (InTech, 2017).
374. Yin, W., Wang, Y., Liu, L. & He, J. Bioﬁlms: the microbial protective clothing in
extreme environments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 3423 (2019).
375. Høiby, N., Bjarnsholt, T., Givskov, M., Molin, S. & Ciofu, O. Antibiotic resistance of
bacterial bioﬁlms. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 35, 322–332 (2010).
376. McLean, R. J. C., Cassanto, J. M., Barnes, M. B. & Koo, J. H. Bacterial bioﬁlm formation
under microgravity conditions. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 195, 115–119 (2001).
377. Kim, W. et al. Spaceﬂight promotes bioﬁlm formation by Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa. PLoS ONE 8, e62437 (2013).
378. Pyle, B. et al. Bacterial Growth on surfaces and in suspensions. in Biorack on
Spacehab vol. 148 (Biological Experiments on Shuttle to Mir Missions 03, 05, and
06, European Space Agency, 1999).
379. Acres, J. M., Youngapelian, M. J. & Nadeau, J. The inﬂuence of spaceﬂight and
simulated microgravity on bacterial motility and chemotaxis. NPJ Microgravity 7,
7 (2021).
380. Beech, I. B. & Sunner, J. Biocorrosion: towards understanding interactions
between bioﬁlms and metals. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 15, 181–186 (2004).
381. Sielaff, A. C. et al. Characterization of the total and viable bacterial and fungal
communities associated with the International Space Station surfaces. Micro-
biome 7, 50 (2019).
382. Dai, X. et al. Corrosion of aluminum alloy 2024 caused by Aspergillus niger. Int.
Biodeterior. Amp. Biodegrad. 115, 1–10 (2016).
383. Rajasekar, A. & Ting, Y.-P. Microbial corrosion of aluminum 2024 aeronautical
alloy by hydrocarbon degrading bacteria Bacillus cereus ACE4 and Serratia
marcescens ACE2. Ind. Amp. Eng. Chem. Res. 49, 6054–6061 (2010).
384. Pavissich, J. P., Vargas, I. T., González, B., Pastén, P. A. & Pizarro, G. E. Culture
dependent and independent analyses of bacterial communities involved in
copper plumbing corrosion. J. Appl. Microbiol. 109, 771–782 (2010).
385. Yang, S., Lin, J. & Lin, Y. Microbiologically induced corrosion of aluminum alloys in
fuel-oil/aqueous system - PubMed. J. Microbiol. Immunol. Infect. 31, 151–164 (1998).
386. Klintworth, R., Reher, H. J., Viktorov, A. N. & Bohle, D. Biological induced corro-
sion of materials II: New test methods and experiences from mir station. Acta
Astronaut. 44, 569–578 (1999).
387. Novikova, N. et al. Survey of environmental biocontamination on board the
International Space Station. Res. Microbiol. 157, 5–12 (2006).
388. Novikova, N. D. Review of the knowledge of microbial contamination of the
Russian Manned Spacecraft. Micro. Ecol. 47, 127–132 (2004).
389. Bacci, G. et al. Microbial community composition of water samples stored inside
the International Space Station. Res. Microbiol. 170, 230–234 (2019).
390. Landry, K. S., Morey, J. M., Bharat, B., Haney, N. M. & Panesar, S. S. Bioﬁlms
impacts on human health and its relevance to space travel. Microorganisms 8,
998 (2020).
A.P. Koehle et al.
25
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 

391. Zea, L. et al. Design of a spaceﬂight bioﬁlm experiment. Acta Astronaut. 148,
294–300 (2018).
392. Yang, J. et al. Longitudinal characterization of multispecies microbial popula-
tions recovered from spaceﬂight potable water. npj Bioﬁlms Microbiomes 7, 1–12
(2021).
393. Carter, D., Wilson, L. & Orozco, N. Status of ISS Water Management and
Recovery. in 41st International Conference on Environmental Systems (American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2011).
394. Zea, L. et al. Potential bioﬁlm control strategies for extended spaceﬂight mis-
sions. Bioﬁlm 2, 100026 (2020).
395. Tirumalai, M. R. et al. The adaptation of Escherichia coli cells grown in simulated
microgravity for an extended period is both phenotypic and genomic. NPJ
Microgravity 3, 15 (2017).
396. Panitz, C., Frösler, J., Wingender, J., Flemming, H.-C. & Rettberg, P. Tolerances of
Deinococcus geothermalis bioﬁlms and planktonic cells exposed to space and
simulated martian conditions in low earth orbit for almost two years. Astro-
biology 19, 979–994 (2019).
397. Flemming, H.-C. et al. Bioﬁlms: an emergent form of bacterial life. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 14, 563–575 (2016).
398. Mauclaire, L. & Egli, M. Effect of simulated microgravity on growth and pro-
duction of exopolymeric substances of Micrococcus luteus space and earth
isolates. FEMS Immunol. Amp. Med. Microbiol. 59, 350–356 (2010).
399. Guo, Y. et al. Effects of space environment on genome, transcriptome, and
proteome of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Arch. Med. Res. 46, 609–618 (2015).
400. Muhammad, M. H. et al. Beyond risk: bacterial bioﬁlms and their regulating
approaches. Front. Microbiol. 11, 928 (2020).
401. Ichikawa, K., Nakamura, H. K., Ogawa, N., Sakimura, T. & Kuroda, M. R&D of long-
term life support system by using electrochemically activated bioﬁlm reactor of
aquatic animals for space examinations. Biol. Sci. Space 13, 348–350 (1999).
402. BfS - Biological dosimetry following radiation exposure - Biological dosimetry
following
radiation
exposure.
https://www.bfs.de/EN/topics/ion/service/
dosimetry/biological-dosimetry/biological-dosimetry.html.
403. Bérces, A. et al. Biological UV dosimeters in the assessment of the biological
hazard from environmental radiation. J. Photochem. Photobio. B 53, 36–43
(1999).
404. Rettberg, P., Horneck, G., Zittermann, A. & Heer, M. Biological dosimetry to
determine the UV radiation climate inside the MIR station and its role in vitamin
D biosynthesis. Adv. Space Res. 22, 1643–1652 (1998).
405. Soucy, S. M., Huang, J. & Gogarten, J. P. Horizontal gene transfer: building the
web of life. Nat. Rev. Genet. 16, 472–482 (2015).
406. Emamalipour, M. et al. Horizontal gene transfer: from evolutionary ﬂexibility to
disease progression. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 8, 229 (2020).
407. Frost, L. S., Leplae, R., Summers, A. O. & Toussaint, A. Mobile genetic elements:
the agents of open source evolution. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 3, 722–732 (2005).
408. Grüll, M. P., Mulligan, M. E. & Lang, A. S. Small extracellular particles with big
potential for horizontal gene transfer: membrane vesicles and gene transfer
agents. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 365, (2018).
409. Brooks, A. N., Turkarslan, S., Beer, K. D., Lo, F. Y. & Baliga, N. S. Adaptation of cells
to new environments. WIREs Syst. Biol. Med. 3, 544–561 (2010).
410. Roberts, A. P. & Kreth, J. The impact of horizontal gene transfer on the
adaptive ability of the human oral microbiome. Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 4,
124 (2014).
411. Koonin, E. V., Makarova, K. S. & Aravind, L. Horizontal gene transfer in prokar-
yotes: quantiﬁcation and classiﬁcation. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 55, 709–742 (2001).
412. Yamaguchi, N. et al. Microbial monitoring of crewed habitats in space current
status and future perspectives. Microbes Environ. 29, 250–260 (2014).
413. Ciferri, O., Tiboni, O., Pasquale, G., di, Orlandoni, A. M. & Marchesi, M. L. Effects of
microgravity on genetic recombination in Escherichia coli. Naturwissenschaften
73, 418–421 (1986).
414. Juergensmeyer, M., Juergensmeyer, E. & Guikema, J. Plasmid acquisition in
microgravity. J. Gravit. Physiol. 2, P161–2 (1995).
415. Boever, Pde et al. Conjugation-mediated plasmid exchange between bacteria
grown under space ﬂight conditions. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 19, 138–144
(2007).
416. Kohler, V., Keller, W. & Grohmann, E. Regulation of Gram-positive conjugation.
Front. Microbiol. 10, 1134 (2019).
417. Beuls, E. et al. Bacillus thuringiensis conjugation in simulated microgravity.
Astrobiology 9, 797–805 (2009).
418. Urbaniak, C., Grams, T., Mason, C. E. & Venkateswaran, K. Simulated microgravity
promotes horizontal gene transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes between
bacterial genera in the absence of antibiotic selective pressure. Life 11, 960
(2021).
419. Jeong, H., Arif, B., Caetano-Anollés, G., Kim, K. M. & Nasir, A. Horizontal gene
transfer in human-associated microorganisms inferred by phylogenetic recon-
struction and reconciliation. Sci. Rep. 9, 5953 (2019).
420. Najar-Peerayeh, S., Moghadas, A. J. & Behmanesh, M. Antibiotic susceptibility
and mecA frequency in Staphylococcus epidermidis, isolated from intensive
care unit patients. Jundishapur J. Microbiol. 7, e11188 (2014).
421. Bloemendaal, A. L. A., Brouwer, E. C. & Fluit, A. C. Methicillin resistance transfer
from Staphylocccus epidermidis to methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aur-
eus in a patient during antibiotic therapy. PLoS ONE 5, e11841 (2010).
422. Massella, E. et al. Antimicrobial resistance proﬁle and ExPEC virulence potential
in commensal Escherichia coli of multiple sources. Antibiotics 10, 351 (2021).
423. Floreani, A., Leung, P. S. C. & Gershwin, M. E. Environmental basis of auto-
immunity. Clin. Rev. Allergy Amp. Immunol. 50, 287–300 (2015).
424. Molina, V. & Shoenfeld, Y. Infection, vaccines and other environmental triggers
of autoimmunity. Autoimmunity 38, 235–245 (2005).
425. Andersson, D. I. & Hughes, D. Antibiotic resistance and its cost: is it possible to
reverse resistance? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8, 260–271 (2010).
426. Heuer, H., Schmitt, H. & Smalla, K. Antibiotic resistance gene spread due to manure
application on agricultural ﬁelds. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 14, 236–243 (2011).
427. Nikaido, H. Multidrug resistance in bacteria. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 78, 119–146
(2009).
428. Allen, H. K. et al. Call of the wild: antibiotic resistance genes in natural envir-
onments. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8, 251–259 (2010).
429. Schiwon, K. et al. Comparison of antibiotic resistance, bioﬁlm formation and
conjugative transfer of Staphylococcus and Enterococcus Isolates from Inter-
national Space Station and Antarctic Research Station Concordia. Micro. Ecol. 65,
638–651 (2013).
430. Urbaniak, C. et al. Detection of antimicrobial resistance genes associated with
the International Space Station environmental surfaces. Sci. Rep. 8, 1–13 (2018).
431. Will, W. R. & Frost, L. S. Hfq is a regulator of F-plasmid TraJ and TraM synthesis in
Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 188, 124–131 (2006).
432. Lerner, A., Matthias, T. & Aminov, R. Potential effects of horizontal gene
exchange in the human gut. Front. Immunol. 8, (2017).
433. Siddiqui, R., Akbar, N. & Khan, N. A. Gut microbiome and human health under
the space environment. J. Appl. Microbiol. 130, 14–24 (2020).
434. Groussin, M. et al. Elevated rates of horizontal gene transfer in the industrialized
human microbiome. Cell 184, 2053–2067.e18 (2021).
435. Ghigo, J.-M. Natural conjugative plasmids induce bacterial bioﬁlm development.
Nature 412, 442–445 (2001).
436. Reisner, A., Haagensen, J. A. J., Schembri, M. A., Zechner, E. L. & Molin, S.
Development and maturation of Escherichia coli K-12 bioﬁlms. Mol. Microbiol. 48,
933–946 (2003).
437. Reisner, A., Höller, B. M., Molin, S. & Zechner, E. L. Synergistic effects in mixed
Escherichia coli bioﬁlms: conjugative plasmid transfer drives bioﬁlm expansion. J.
Bacteriol. 188, 3582–3588 (2006).
438. Gama, J. A. et al. Dominance between plasmids determines the extent of bioﬁlm
formation. Front. Microbiol. 11, 2070 (2020).
439. Burmølle, M., Bahl, M. I., Jensen, L. B., Sørensen, S. J. & Hansen, L. H. Type 3
ﬁmbriae, encoded by the conjugative plasmid pOLA52, enhance bioﬁlm for-
mation and transfer frequencies in Enterobacteriaceae strains. Microbiol. (N. Y)
154, 187–195 (2008).
440. Schroll, C., Barken, K. B., Krogfelt, K. A. & Struve, C. Role of type 1 and type 3
ﬁmbriae in Klebsiella pneumoniae bioﬁlm formation. BMC Microbiol. 10, 179
(2010).
441. Vaishampayan, A. & Grohmann, E. Multi-resistant bioﬁlm-forming pathogens on
the International Space Station. J. Biosci. 44, 125 (2019).
442. Ong, C.-L. Y. et al. Identiﬁcation of type 3 ﬁmbriae in uropathogenic Escherichia
coli reveals a role in bioﬁlm formation. J. Bacteriol. 190, 1054–1063 (2008).
443. Bai, P., Li, Y. & Xu, H. Markedly decreased growth rate and bioﬁlm formation
ability of Acinetobacter schindleri after a long-duration (64 days) spaceﬂight.
Eur. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci. 26, 4001–4015 (2022).
444. Zhang, B., Bai, P. & Wang, D. Growth behavior and transcriptome proﬁle analysis
of Proteus Mirabilis strain under long- versus short-term simulated microgravity
environment. Pol. J. Microbiol. 71, 161 (2022).
445. Hausner, M. & Wuertz, S. High rates of conjugation in bacterial bioﬁlms as
determined by quantitative in situ analysis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65,
3710–3713 (1999).
446. Lécuyer, F. et al. Bioﬁlm formation drives transfer of the conjugative element ICE
Bs1 in Bacillus subtilis. mSphere 3, e00473–18 (2018).
447. Uruén, C., Chopo-Escuin, G., Tommassen, J., Mainar-Jaime, R. C. & Arenas, J.
Bioﬁlms as promoters of bacterial antibiotic resistance and tolerance. Antibiotics
10, 3 (2020).
448. Savage, V. J., Chopra, I. & ONeill, A. J. Staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlms promote
horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57,
1968–1970 (2013).
449. Trieu-Cuot, P., Carlier, C., Martin, P. & Courvalin, P. Plasmid transfer by con-
jugation from Escherichia coli to Gram-positive bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 48,
289–294 (1987).
A.P. Koehle et al.
26
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

450. Mazodier, P., Petter, R. & Thompson, C. Intergeneric conjugation between
Escherichia coli and Streptomyces species. J. Bacteriol. 171, 3583–3585 (1989).
451. Hamilton, T. A. et al. Efﬁcient inter-species conjugative transfer of a CRISPR
nuclease for targeted bacterial killing. Nat. Commun. 10, 4544 (2019).
452. Dominguez, W. & O’Sullivan, D. J. Developing an efﬁcient and reproducible
conjugation-based gene transfer system for biﬁdobacteria. Microbiology 159,
328–338 (2013).
453. Samperio, S. et al. Conjugative DNA transfer from E. coli to transformation-
resistant Lactobacilli. Front. Microbiol. 12, 606629 (2021).
454. Brumwell, S. L., Belois, K. D., van, Giguere, D. J., Edgell, D. R. & Karas, B. J.
Conjugation-based genome engineering in Deinococcus radiodurans. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.13.464295 (2021).
455. Heinemann, J. A. & Sprague, G. F. Bacterial conjugative plasmids mobilize DNA
transfer between bacteria and yeast. Nature 340, 205–209 (1989).
456. Reuter, A. et al. Targeted-antibacterial-plasmids (TAPs) combining conjugation
and CRISPR/Cas systems achieve strain-speciﬁc antibacterial activity. https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.12.335968 (2020).
457. Kiga, K. et al. Development of CRISPR-Cas13a-based antimicrobials capable of
sequence-speciﬁc killing of target bacteria. Nat. Commun. 11, 2934 (2020).
458. Price, V. J. et al. Enterococcus faecalis CRISPR-Cas is a robust barrier to con-
jugative antibiotic resistance dissemination in the murine intestine. https://
doi.org/10.1101/312751 (2018).
459. Zhou, Y. et al. The type I-E CRISPR-Cas system inﬂuences the acquisition of blaKPC-
IncF plasmid in Klebsiella pneumonia. Emerg. Microbes Infect. 9, 1011 (2020).
460. Singh, N. K., Wood, J. M., Karouia, F. & Venkateswaran, K. Succession and per-
sistence of microbial communities and antimicrobial resistance genes asso-
ciated with International Space Station environmental surfaces. Microbiome 6,
204 (2018).
461. Bryan, N. C. et al. Genomic and functional characterization of Enterococcus
faecalis isolates recovered from the International Space Station and their
potential for pathogenicity. Front. Microbiol. 11, 515319 (2021).
462. Marrafﬁni, L. A. & Sontheimer, E. J. CRISPR interference limits horizontal gene
transfer in Staphylococci by targeting DNA. Science 322, 1843–1845 (2008).
463. Kaminski, M. M., Abudayyeh, O. O., Gootenberg, J. S., Zhang, F. & Collins, J. J.
CRISPR-based diagnostics. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5, 643–656 (2021).
464. Rauch, J. N. et al. A scalable, easy-to-deploy protocol for Cas13-based detection
of SARS-CoV-2 genetic material. J. Clin. Microbiol. 59, e02402–20 (2021).
465. Broughton, J. P. et al. CRISPR–Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Bio-
technol. 38, 870–874 (2020).
466. Stahl-Rommel, S. et al. A CRISPR-based assay for the study of eukaryotic DNA
repair onboard the International Space Station. PLoS ONE 16, e0253403 (2021).
467. Clark, R. L. et al. Design of synthetic human gut microbiome assembly and
function. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.19.241315 (2020).
468. Wu, H., Moser, C., Wang, H.-Z., Høiby, N. & Song, Z.-J. Strategies for combating
bacterial bioﬁlm infections. Int. J. Oral. Sci. 7, 1–7 (2014).
469. Buchovec, I., Gricajeva, A., Kalėdienė, L. & Vitta, P. Antimicrobial photoinactiva-
tion approach based on natural agents for control of bacteria bioﬁlms in
Spacecraft. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 6932 (2020).
470. Hahn, C. et al. Pure and oxidized copper materials as potential antimicrobial
surfaces for spaceﬂight activities. Astrobiology 17, 1183–1191 (2017).
471. Siems, K. et al. Testing laser-structured antimicrobial surfaces under space condi-
tions: the design of the ISS experiment BIOFILMS. Front. Space Technol. 0, 14 (2022).
472. Sobisch, L.-Y. et al. Bioﬁlm forming antibiotic resistant Gram-positive pathogens
isolated from surfaces on the International Space Station. Front. Microbiol. 10,
543 (2019).
473. Pipiya, S. O. et al. Engineering artiﬁcial biodiversity of lantibiotics to expand
chemical space of DNA-encoded antibiotics. Biochemistry 85, 1319–1334 (2020).
474. Walsh, D. J., Livinghouse, T., Goeres, D. M., Mettler, M. & Stewart, P. S. Anti-
microbial activity of naturally occurring phenols and derivatives against bioﬁlm
and Planktonic bacteria. Front. Chem. 7, 653 (2019).
475. Francolini, I., Vuotto, C., Piozzi, A. & Donelli, G. Antifouling and antimicrobial
biomaterials: an overview. APMIS 125, 392–417 (2017).
476. Goodband, S. J., Armstrong, S., Kusumaatmaja, H. & Vötchovsky, K. Effect of
ageing on the structure and properties of model liquid-infused surfaces.
Langmuir 36, 3461–3470 (2020).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge funds from a NASA 2020 Space Biology (NNH18ZTT001N-
FG2) grant (80NSSC21K0320) awarded to C.U.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.K., S.B., E.S., A.L., and C.U. wrote the manuscript; A.K., S.B., and C.U. edited the
manuscript; C.U. prepared the concept and outline of the manuscript and provided
feedback to all authors. All authors reviewed the ﬁnal draft and approved it for
submission.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Camilla
Urbaniak.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
license,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
A.P. Koehle et al.
27
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  47 
