Research Articles
Molecular Muscle Experiment:
Hardware and Operational Lessons for Future
Astrobiology Space Experiments
Amelia K. Pollard,1 Christopher J. Gaffney,2,3 Colleen S. Deane,2 Michele Balsamo,4 Michael Cooke,1,2
Rebecca A. Ellwood,1 Jennifer E. Hewitt,5 Beata E. Mierzwa,6 Alessandro Mariani,4 Siva A. Vanapalli,5
Timothy Etheridge,2 and Nathaniel J. Szewczyk1
Abstract
Biology experiments in space seek to increase our understanding of what happens to life beyond Earth and
how we can safely send life beyond Earth. Spaceﬂight is associated with many (mal)adaptations in physi-
ology, including decline in musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, vestibular, and immune systems. Biological
experiments in space are inherently challenging to implement. Development of hardware and validation of
experimental conditions are critical to ensure the collection of high-quality data. The model organism
Caenorhabditis elegans has been studied in space for more than 20 years to better understand spaceﬂight-
induced (patho)physiology, particularly spaceﬂight-induced muscle decline. These experiments have used a
variety of hardware conﬁgurations. Despite this, hardware used in the past was not available for our most
recent experiment, the Molecular Muscle Experiment (MME). Therefore, we had to design and validate ﬂight
hardware for MME. MME provides a contemporary example of many of the challenges faced by researchers
conducting C. elegans experiments onboard the International Space Station. Here, we describe the hardware
selection and validation, in addition to the ground-based experiment scientiﬁc validation testing. These
experiences and operational solutions allow others to replicate and/or improve our experimental design on
future missions. Key Words: Spaceﬂight—Space biology—Astrobiology—C. elegans—Hardware develop-
ment. Astrobiology 20, 935–943.
1. Introduction
S
pace is an extreme environment in which humans have
been routinely living and working for more than 20 years,
and ambitions remain to live and work further beyond Earth.
Spaceﬂight is associated with deconditioning of multiple bodily
systems, including the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, vestib-
ular, and immune systems (Demontis et al., 2017; Strollo et al.,
2018). Physiological decline occurs despite participation in
exercise countermeasures, which are a potent stimulus to pro-
mote musculoskeletal and cardiovascular adaptation (Trappe
et al., 2009) and optimal immune function (Simpson et al.,
2015) on Earth. While vestibular adaptations take place in the
ﬁrst days after transition to the microgravity environment, de-
cline in musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and immune systems
can worsen with missions of greater duration (Fitts et al., 2010;
Strollo et al., 2018), potentially limiting our capacity for inter-
planetary missions such as to Mars (Gaffney et al., 2017).
These challenges have motivated research around strate-
gies to prevent this (mal)adaptation in space. As the precise
1MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research and NIHR Nottingham BRC, University of Nottingham, Medical
School Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, United Kingdom.
2Sport and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
3Lancaster Medical School, Furness College, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.
4Kayser Italia, Livorno, Italy.
5Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas.
6Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California.
 Amelia K. Pollard et al., 2020; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly credited.
ASTROBIOLOGY
Volume 20, Number 8, 2020
Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ast.2019.2181
935

molecular mechanisms of spaceﬂight-induced physiological
deconditioning have not been identiﬁed, this limits our
ability to design molecularly rationalized countermeasures.
Biological experiments in space can, however, be method-
ologically challenging. Although the United States has desig-
nated the US segment of the International Space Station (ISS)
as a National Laboratory, experiments are not routinely carried
out by using standardized equipment or methods that are in
common use in other laboratories on Earth. Size, power, mass,
late access for experiment integration onto the rocket, and
ability to oversee the experiment remain challenges, despite
more than 40 years of conducting biology experiments in
space. Thus, the development of hardware and the validation of
experimental conditions remain critical in the acquisition of
quality data that can ultimately promote understanding of bi-
ological changes in space that should underpin rationale
countermeasures to physiological changes in space.
Our current experiment, the Molecular Muscle Experiment
(MME), uses the model organism, Caenorhabditis elegans,
to explore the molecular mechanisms of spaceﬂight-induced
muscle atrophy. C. elegans is an established model organism
for studies on Earth (Kaletta and Hengartner, 2006; Corsi
et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2018) and in space (Szewczyk et al.,
2008; Higashitani et al., 2009; Honda et al., 2012, 2014;
Higashibata et al., 2016).
In the context of very limited access to space, the short life
span and microscopic size of C. elegans enable data to be
collected across the entire life span (Gaffney et al., 2018a) in
high n numbers and replicates to generate robust data rapidly.
The operational requirements of MME include many that
apply to biological payloads across species (e.g., late access,
temperature-controlled upload/download, and time critical
astronaut interventions). MME is therefore a generalizable
example of many of the challenges in conducting contem-
porary astrobiology research onboard the ISS.
C. elegans have been studied in space for more than 20 years
by using a variety of spaceﬂight hardware conﬁgurations
(Ishioka and Higashibata, 2019). With the exception of STS-
107 (Szewczyk et al., 2005), all past ﬂights involved in the
study of C. elegans have used nonstandard laboratory hard-
ware. It is therefore not surprising that C. elegans spaceﬂight
experiments can fail due to lack of sufﬁcient oxygen to support
the worms (Warren et al., 2013), a problem that can be dealt
with through preﬂight ground testing. Here, we describe the
hardware selection and validation in addition to the ground-
based experiment sequence validation testing for MME.
The ﬁrst key challenge was overcoming the difﬁculty of
growing worms inside plastic bags. The second key chal-
lenge was working out timings to allow upload to the ISS
using passive temperature control. These studies should al-
low other researchers to replicate and/or improve our ex-
perimental design on future missions.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Nematode and bacteria preparation
The C. elegans strain PD55 (ccIs55 (unc-54::lacZ) V)
was used for development and testing phases of this study.
Animals were cultured at 20C by using standard methods
on nematode growth media plates. To obtain L1 animals,
age synchronizations were carried out by gravity settling as
described previously (Gaffney et al., 2014). During the
hardware development phases, Escherichia coli OP50 was
grown overnight in LB-broth, centrifuged, and resuspended
in S-Basal; 500 or 5000 L1 were used in experiments with
3–10 mL of OP50.
During the hardware development phases and all exper-
imentation unless stipulated otherwise, stocks were prepared
by adding 5000 L1 larvae to 6 mL of freeze-dried OP50
(LabTie; StartLife, Netherlands) in S-Basal. Freeze-dried
OP50 was made by using LabTie’s protocol of 1 vial per
250 mL S-Basal. To streamline procedures for launch
preparation, worms to be ﬂown (PD55 (ccIs55 (unc-
54::lacZ) V), CF1038 (daf-16 (mu86) I), CF1139 (daf-16
(mu86) I; muIs61 (daf-16::GFP)?), PJ1145 (ccIs55 (unc-
54::lacZ) V; njEx38 (unc-54p::daf-2(+) + goa-1p::GFP +
rol-6 (su1006))), DM2 (dim-1 (ra102) X)) were cultured in
freeze-dried OP50 in S-Basal in 75 cm2 cell culture ﬂasks.
Animals were cultured for a minimum of 2 weeks following
transfer from plates before synchronization.
During ﬁnal preﬂight testing of the launch procedures,
age synchronizations were carried out from liquid culture
stocks rather than from plates to obtain 5000 L1 larvae the
day before loading into bags. These cultures were left
overnight in 6-well tissue culture dishes in a ﬁnal volume of
500 mL freeze-dried OP50 in S-Basal at 20C. The next day,
6 mL freeze-dried OP50 was pipetted into each well before
loading into ﬂight culture bags.
2.2. Validation of culture bags
The experimental design for launch involved growing
worms inside gas-permeable plastic bags onboard the ISS.
Therefore, we tested the biocompatibility of three different
bag materials: (i) polyethylene (PE) bags (1.5 inch, 250
gauge, Lay Flat Polythene Tubing; Kite Packaging Ltd.,
United Kingdom), (ii) Japanese Aerospace Exploration
Agency (JAXA) PE bags (Nipro, Japan), and (iii) ﬂuorinated
ethylene propylene (FEP) bags (Saint-Gobain Performance
Plastics; TOSS GmbH, Germany). The PE bags and FEP bags
are low friction and allow good gas exchange of oxygen and
carbon dioxide, although gas exchange is reported to be su-
perior in FEP to PE in bags of equal thickness (NB. all bags
have previously supported C. elegans cultures in spaceﬂight
experiments onboard the ISS).
The JAXA bags are a proprietary PE blend that is no
longer commercially available. To test the bags, 5000 L1
larvae were placed in the bag with OP50 before bags were
heat sealed (Pacseal+ impulse heat sealer; Rajapack, United
Kingdom), and then, the worms were cultured for 7 days at
20C. After 7 days, the total worm population in each bag
was counted. Three biological replicates were carried out
per condition. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was carried out in GraphPad Prism to compare the popula-
tions of worms in the three bags.
2.3. Oxygen consumption rates
To investigate whether diet inﬂuenced changes in oxygen
consumption rates (OCR), measurements were carried out with
the Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA), as
previously described (Hewitt et al., 2018; Koopman et al.,
2016). Worms were cultured in either chemically deﬁned
media [C. elegans maintenance media, CeMM (Szewczyk
et al., 2003), purchased from Cell Guidance Systems custom
936
POLLARD ET AL.

media service, United Kingdom], or freeze-dried OP50 in
S-Basal. Adult animals were washed twice in incubation media
[M9
buffer:
22.04 mM
KH2PO4,
42.27 mM
Na2HPO4,
85.56mM NaCl (ﬁnal concentrations, sterilized)] and placed in
200 mL M9-ﬁlled wells of standard Seahorse plates (20 worms/
well) in 5 replicates per condition. Stable OCR measurements
were taken by performing ﬁve measurement cycles for basal
OCR, nine cycles for maximal OCR following the addition of
carbonyl cyanide p-triﬂuoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP)
(10 mM ﬁnal well concentration), and ﬁve cycles for non-
mitochondrial OCR following the addition of sodium azide
(40 nM ﬁnal well concentration).
OCR measurements were normalized to the number of
worms per well. To obtain stable OCR measurements, the ﬁnal
three, seven, and two measurement cycles were used for the
statistical analysis of basal, maximal, and nonmitochondrial
OCR, respectively, as previously described (Hewitt et al.,
2018). Differences in OCR were detected with a one-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test using
GraphPad Prism 8 (La Jolla, CA). Statistical signiﬁcance was
set at p < 0.05.
2.4. Culture volume optimization
Age-synchronized L1 larvae were placed into experimental
bags containing freeze-dried OP50 in S-Basal (5000 L1 worms
per bag). The amount of OP50 in the bag was optimized where
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10mL volumes were tested. Three
biological replicates were carried out per condition.
2.5. Hardware development and validation
For ﬂight, the experimental bags were to be placed into
European Space Agency (ESA) experiment cassettes (ECs).
As C. elegans require oxygen to develop, gas exchange
between the inside of the EC and outside of the EC is re-
quired. ECs that allowed gas exchange via a gas-permeable
Gortex membrane have previously been used with C. ele-
gans onboard the ISS (Szewczyk et al., 2008); unfortu-
nately, these were no longer available for use with MME.
Therefore, we had to design (Fig. 1) and validate new ECs
(Kayser Italia, Livorno, Italy).
To validate how well worms would grow inside the ECs,
three bags each loaded with 5000 L1 worms and 6 mL
freeze-dried OP50 in S-Basal were cultured inside the EC
for 1 week at 20C. Once complete, the population of viable
worms in the bags were counted under a dissecting micro-
scope (Nikon SMZ645; Nikon, Japan) and compared against
control bags that were otherwise identical except were lo-
cated outside the EC.
Two different cage inserts for the ECs were designed and
tested to maintain separation between the bags during the
turbulent upload phase of launch, to maintain a surface area
for gas exchange in ﬂight, and to prevent the bags from
freezing together at the end of the experiment. To test which
cage design was best, worms were grown in bags alone, in
cage design 1, and in cage design 2. Upon selection of cage
design 2, further testing was carried out by growing worms
in bags alone, in cage 2 alone, and in cage 2 inside an EC.
Three biological replicates were carried out per condition.
2.6. Validation of experimental timings
As MME was to be uploaded in an active state (e.g., worms
were not placed in stasis), and as launches to the ISS are often
associated with delays due to inclement weather or technical
problems, we needed to validate our experimental design to
conﬁrm that it could withstand launch delays. To test this, we
obtained upload times from handover to installation on the
ISS from NASA cold stowage for previous SpaceX launches
(Table 1), as well as data for the performance of 10C and
12C ICE Bricks passive upload cold stowage phase change
material over upload to ISS time frames.
Using these data, we loaded 5000 L1 larvae into 6 mL of
freeze-dried OP50 in S-Basal into the bags inside the full EC
setup (including the cage insert) and tested various upload
scenarios. Following upload scenario testing, we ran the full
experiment simulating a scheduled launch, a 24 h delay, and
a 48 h delay. Following these simulations, the total worm
populations were counted and compared with the nominal
FIG. 1.
Hardware for the MME. Images of the hardware
used for the experiment include (A) the ﬁrst cage prototype
and (B) the second cage prototype developed by Kayser
Italia. (C) The assembly of experimental bags and cages
within the EC. EC, experiment cassette; MME, Molecular
Muscle Experiment. Color image is available online.
Table 1. Duration from Launch: 26 H Turnover
to NASA Cold Stowage Until Installation
on the International Space Station
Mission
Handover to installation, h
SpX-4
130
SpX-5
97
SpX-6
137
SpX-8
91
SpX-9
105
SpX-10
152
SpX-11
138
SpX-12
90
SpX-13
94
SpX-14
94
MME GROUND VALIDATION
937

(on-time) launch scenario. A nominal launch scenario is
associated with the generation of >45,000 worms per bag,
which is the requirement for postﬂight analysis. To deter-
mine whether our experimental design could withstand a 24
or 48 h delay, we set a matched population threshold of
>45,000 worms per bag at the end of the experiment.
3. Results
3.1. Evaluation and selection of culture bags
Several previous spaceﬂight experiments have grown
worms in liquid culture inside plastic experimental bags (Selch
et al., 2008; Szewczyk et al., 2008; Higashitani et al., 2009); in
some cases, worms were grown with an OP50 diet, in others
with a CeMM diet. While it is not usual to grow C. elegans
inside plastic bags on Earth, containment of liquid is a safety
requirement onboard the ISS. We therefore sought to establish
a plastic culture bag that would allow worm growth for MME.
We evaluated three culture bags based on past use in
C. elegans ﬂight experiments. Unsurprisingly, the PE bags we
selected to replicate the bags used on ICE-FIRST (Szewczyk
et al., 2008) and the JAXA bags we selected to replicate the
bags used on CERISE (Higashitani et al., 2009) performed
well at supporting worm growth (Fig. 2). However, the FEP
bags we selected to replicate bags tested on Earth (Szewczyk
et al., 2003) for ﬂight use failed to support growth, with more
than half of the worms actually dying in the bags (Fig. 2).
3.2. Diet induces changes in OCR
Given that past ground tests with FEP bags (Szewczyk
et al., 2003) and a past ﬂight with culture chambers utilizing
FEP for gas exchange (Oczypok et al., 2012) successfully
supported C. elegans growth, we wanted to understand why
FEP bags did not work in our ground testing (Fig. 2). Since
both past reports of use of FEP involved growing worms in
CeMM rather than the OP50 diet used in MME, we were
curious if the failure to grow was due to the food source.
Worms grown in CeMM take longer to develop, have longer
life expectancies, exhibit altered gene expression, and ex-
hibit the characteristics of dietary restriction (Szewczyk
et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2015).
Given the physiological and gene expression changes in
CeMM-grown worms, we hypothesized that worms grown in
CeMM have differences in metabolism compared with those
grown in OP50. To examine whether these different diets alter
metabolism, we used the Seahorse XFe24 Analyzer (Agilent)
to measure oxygen consumption in worms grown chronically
in CeMM and OP50. As shown in Fig. 3, worms grown in
CeMM have signiﬁcantly lower basal levels of oxygen con-
sumption. This suggests that OP50-grown worms could have
been limited for oxygen inside the FEP bags, whereas the
CeMM grown worms were not. The use of CeMM rather than
OP50 as a food source may therefore reduce the oxygen ex-
change requirement and thus increase the viability of worm
experiments conducted inside plastic culture bags on the ISS.
3.3. Optimizing culture volume in the ﬂight bags
Having determined that gas exchange was a limiting factor
for worm growth inside plastic culture bags, we re-evaluated
the surface area to volume ratio of our bags versus past ﬂights
CERISE (Higashitani et al., 2009) and ICE-FIRST (Szewc-
zyk et al., 2008) as this ratio also inﬂuences oxygen avail-
ability for the worms within the bags. As shown in Fig. 4, the
surface area to volume ratio for CERISE, which used the
OP50 diet, was 8.4 cm2/mL, whereas the ratio for ICE-
FIRST, which used the CeMM diet, was 10 cm2/mL. We
therefore maintained the size of the bag and altered the vol-
ume of worms + OP50 feed solution, testing volumes between
3 and 10 mL. Based on CERISE, which used JAXA bags, we
expected a ratio of around 8.4 cm2/mL, which equates to a
little more than 7 mL of liquid culture in the bag.
FIG. 2.
Growth of Caenorhabditis elegans in different
plastic culture bags. Five thousand L1 larvae were loaded in
standard Petri dishes, PE bags, JAXA bags, or FEP bags and
cultured for 1 week at 20C (all conditions in triplicate).
Growth in PE bags was not signiﬁcantly different from Petri
dish controls, whereas both JAXA ( **p < 0.01) and FEP
( ****p < 0.0001) have reduced growth compared with
controls. Both PE and JAXA produce viable numbers of
worms for the analysis requirements, whereas FEP do not.
FEP, ﬂuorinated ethylene propylene; JAXA, Japanese
Aerospace Exploration Agency; PE, polyethylene.
FIG. 3.
C. elegans grown on a bacterial diet display in-
creased oxygen consumption compared with a chemically de-
ﬁned diet. Twenty adult worms grown on bacterial diet (OP50)
or chemically deﬁned diet (CeMM) were analyzed in a Sea-
horse XF Analyzer (n = 5 replicates per condition). In both the
basal state ( ***p < 0.001) and in the maximal state following
injectionof FCCP ( ****p < 0.0001),oxygenconsumption rates
are signiﬁcantly higher in OP50 compared with CeMM.
**p < 0.01. CeMM, C. elegans maintenance media; FCCP,
carbonyl cyanide p-triﬂuoromethoxyphenylhydrazone; SA,
sodium azide.
938
POLLARD ET AL.

To preserve the limited available stocks of JAXA bags
and to validate materials readily available for future ﬂights,
we used PE bags instead of the JAXA bags for testing.
Testing with PE bags (Fig. 4) revealed that the maximum
volume in the PE culture bag should be 6–7 mL, which is
roughly consistent with the past performance of the JAXA
bags during CERISE. Together, these results highlight the
importance of considering and testing surface area for gas
exchange when designing C. elegans spaceﬂight experi-
ments involving liquid cultures.
3.4. Flight hardware validation
The culture bags were to be held within ECs to provide an
additional level of containment, thus increasing the safety of
the crew as well as protecting the cultures themselves from
launch and/or in-ﬂight damage. As shown in Fig. 1, cages to
contain the bags within the ECs were designed to enforce
space between the culture bags during launch, ensure gas
exchange, and prevent culture bags from freezing together at
the end of the experiment. As shown in Fig. 5, when culture
bags were used either outside or inside cage design 2, which
had more space between the bags, there was no signiﬁcant
difference in worm growth. In contrast, cage design 1, which
had less space between the bags, had signiﬁcantly less
growth than outside the cage. Thus, cage design 2 was
adopted for MME.
Next, growth in the culture bags inside the ECs with or
without the cages was evaluated. As shown in Fig. 6, no
FIG. 4.
Optimization of culture volume in PE bags. (A) Volume of liquid culture and surface area to volume ratio in
CERISE, ICE-FIRST, and MME. (B) Worm population size after starting with 5000 L1 worms, which were allowed to grow
for 7 days at 20C (n = 3 replicates), using different culture volumes in PE. Worm growth is optimal between 5 and 7 mL
culture volume with a surface area to volume ratio in the range of 10 cm2/mL.
FIG. 5.
Growth of worms within prototype cages. Five
hundred L1 worms were grown in culture bags for 7 days at
20C, either within or not within a cage design (n = 3 rep-
licates). Worm growth was lower in cage 1 compared with
no cage ( **p < 0.01), whereas there was no signiﬁcant dif-
ference in worm growth between no cage and cage 2.
FIG. 6.
Validating growth of worms within the full ex-
perimental design. Five thousand L1 worms were grown in
PE culture bags for 7 days at 20C (n = 3 replicates). Three
bags were grown without additional hardware, three bags
were placed in the cage without the cassette, and three bags
were placed in the complete experimental container (cage
and cassette, Fig. 1). No signiﬁcant differences in growth
were observed.
MME GROUND VALIDATION
939

signiﬁcant differences in worm growth were noted for
worms grown in PE culture bags outside or inside cage
design 2, conﬁrming prior testing (Fig. 5). Furthermore,
there were no signiﬁcant differences for worms grown in PE
culture bags alone versus inside the combined cage and ECs.
3.5. Optimizing culture conditions for upload
To allow for comparison of our anticipated gene ex-
pression data with gene expression data from ICE-FIRST
(Szewczyk et al., 2008) and CERISE (Higashitani et al.,
2009), it was important that we time our cultures to enter
adulthood following birth and development in space. As
our experiment did not involve an activation step like
CERISE, we conducted it as a timed upload like ICE-
FIRST. However, for MME, the launch vehicle was
SpaceX’s Dragon and not Russia’s Soyuz, and active
temperature control during upload was not preferred from
an operations perspective.
Therefore, as SpaceX’s Dragon is frequently subjected to
launch delays and as phase change materials could be used
to maintain temperature during upload, it was important that
we test various upload scenarios to establish working tim-
ings for upload to the ISS such that the worms were at an
appropriate developmental stage, population density, and
had not run out of food. As shown in Table 2, we started
testing with ﬁxed temperature of a duration calculated to
allow P0 animals to grow to adulthood during upload (days
1–3/4) and the F1 generation to grow to mid-adulthood after
living only in the spaceﬂight environment (days 3–8). We
found that this duration exhausted our food source as evi-
denced by lack of visible food and presence of Dauer larvae.
Reducing growth by 1 day resulted in viable worms of
sufﬁcient numbers for analysis (Table 2 and Figs. 2 and 6).
Unfortunately, with a maximum possible late turnover of
payload at launch of—24 h, 3 days from turnover until instal-
lation in an incubator onboard the ISS was not a realistic
timeline to produce viable animal cultures. Thus, for the
timelines/late handover scenario associated with a Dragon
launchscenario, similar toICE-FIRST (Szewczyk etal., 2008),
we would require active temperature control throughout up-
load. We therefore moved on to test other scenarios that were,
from an operations perspective, preferred.
We next tested the effect of cold incubation during the
prelaunch (1 day) or prelaunch plus longest reported cold
stowage upload via Dragon (Table 2, 8 days). For these tests,
we also reduced the time of culturing at 20C by half a day as
we anticipated some level of development to occur while at
12C. As shown in Table 2, chilling of the cultures for the
day between handover and launch allowed for viable cul-
tures, subjected to the same operational issues as when
culturing at 20C, whereas 8 days of chilling the cultures did
not allow for all cultures tested to be viable.
We therefore tested short cold stowage upload (1 day
handover to launch with 2 days from launch to the ISS) and
longest reported cold stowage upload via Dragon (8 days)
with a further half-day reduction in the time of culturing at
20C. As shown in Table 2, both short and long cold stowage
followed by 6 days of incubation produced viable cultures.
These results suggested that even the longest duration cold
stowage followed by a period of incubation onboard the ISS
would be a suitable operational solution for MME.
As passive rather than active temperature control was pre-
ferred for upload operations, we tested the effect of passive
cold stowage using NASA’s phase change materials. Given
that 12C active temperature control during upload produced
viable cultures, we ﬁrst tested NASA’s 12C phase change
materials temperature proﬁle during long upload. As shown in
Table 2, long cold stowage when using NASA’s 12C phase
change materials temperature proﬁle did not produce viable
cultures, with worms running out of food about 1 day before
the end of the incubation at 20C.
This result may appear surprising; however, the phase
change material starts at 10C and ramps up to 14C over the
period of cold stowage. Thus, from an engineering perspec-
tive, the 12C phase change materials do indeed maintain
12C – 2C, but from a biological perspective, this is quite
different from the 12C – 0.5C achieved via active temper-
ature control. Conﬁrming that 10C phase change materials
also maintain within +/-2C, we tested long cold stowage
using NASA’s 10C phase change materials temperature
proﬁle, which did produce viable cultures (Table 2).
Having conﬁrmed a viable passive stowage upload sce-
nario for MME, we ﬁnally tested the impact of a short up-
load scenario with the 10C phase change materials (1 day
turnover to launch, 3 days to station, 1 day to put in incu-
bator) and found that this also produced viable cultures
(Table 2). Thus, through various iterations of testing that
included what we might do to culture worms in our own
laboratory, to implementing operational restrictions im-
posed by launch and upload to the ISS coupled with a better
understanding of passive cold stowage performance, we
were able to achieve a viable experimental protocol. Im-
portantly, the data from this testing also inform of the ability
of the experimental protocol to perform in other, off-
nominal scenarios.
Table 2. Operation Scenarios Tested
Duration
Temperature
proﬁle
Outcome
8 Days
20C
Not viable, ran out of food
7 Days
20C
Viable, no Dauer larvae
1 Day
12C
Viable
+6.5 Days
20C
8 Days
12C
Some tests ran out of food
around day 5.5 at 20C
+6.5 Days
20C
3 Days
12C
Viable
+6 Days
20C
8 Days
12C
Viable, food close
to exhaustion
+6 Days
20C
8 Days
NASA 12C
phase change
Ran out of food around
day 5 at 20C
+6 Days
20C
8 Days
NASA 10C
phase change
Viable
+6 Days
20C
5 Days
NASA 10C
phase change
Viable
+6 Days
20C
940
POLLARD ET AL.

3.6. Validation of launch procedures, upload timings,
and simulated incubation on the ISS
Having ﬁnalized an operationally acceptable upload sce-
nario,wepreparedfor ﬂight.First,tohelpincreasethe visibility
of our outreach efforts (Gaffney et al., 2018b), we developed
and ﬁnalized a mission logo (Fig. 7). This was distributed to
*2000 members of the public, mainly school children, be-
tween ﬁnal ground testing and launch and created a ‘‘brand’’
for our experiment that was used by the UK government and
media, which reached an estimated 41 million people.
Second, in consultation with ESA, we agreed a nominal
launch scenario to be used in our ﬁnal testing (Fig. 8A) as
well as to assess the impact of a 24- and 48-h launch delay
on our ﬁnalized experimental timeline. Note that a notional
period of time (7 days) was used to simulate time in the
Minus Eighty Laboratory Freezer for ISS (MELFI) before
download of the samples back to Earth. As shown in
Fig. 8B, cultures from the nominal and both launch delay
scenarios grew as expected.
4. Discussion
The desired culture bag and EC hardware used in the past
were not available for use with MME. Therefore, what
should have been a straightforward repurposing of previ-
ously ﬂown hardware became a program of work to redesign
and revalidate ﬂight hardware. This entailed dealing with
the frequent challenges of successfully designing and ﬂying
an experiment to the ISS: use and validation of nonstandard
laboratory hardware and validation of experimental timings
for upload of biologically active experiments to the ISS.
We evaluated three culture bags based on past use in
C. elegans ﬂight experiments. Unsurprisingly, two of the
bags selected to replicate bags used in previous ﬂight per-
formed well. However, one of the bags selected, made of
FEP, was not compatible with worm growth despite having
previously been used. This result was particularly striking as
FEP is reported to have better gas exchange properties than
PE and is why FEP bags are used to ﬂy cell culture exper-
iments (Vassy et al., 2001). Upon closer inspection of the
speciﬁcations of the PE and FEP bags, it was clear that the
PE bags were half as thick as the FEP bags and therefore
performed better as a gas exchange surface despite worse
performance as a material.
As both PE and FEP bags are nonstandard equipment for
growing C. elegans, these ﬁndings highlight the importance
of properly testing proposed ﬂight hardware before ﬂight, as
selecting FEP bags for better gas exchange and ease of use
properties (e.g., the capacity to load animals into bags via
injection ports) was the operational preference before test-
ing. Having uncovered that gas exchange did appear to be a
concern for growing worms in plastic bags, we tested if
culture volume to gas exchange surface area impacted cul-
ture growth. Unsurprisingly, we found that it did, which
enabled us to optimize culture volume for MME, something
not done for ICE-FIRST (Szewczyk et al., 2008).
FIG. 8.
Final experimental timeline veriﬁcation test. (A) Timing details for nominal upload, 24 h, and 48 h delays to
launch. (B) Population growth after the full experiment following a nominal upload, and a simulated 24 and 48 h delay.
One-way ANOVA is not signiﬁcant between the three groups. ANOVA, analysis of variance.
FIG. 7.
MME mission logo.
MME GROUND VALIDATION
941

We also examined worm oxygen consumption using the
diet from ICE-FIRST, CeMM (Szewczyk et al., 2008), and
the diet from CERISE, OP50 (Higashitani et al., 2009).
Consistent with the biological changes for worms grown in
CeMM (Szewczyk et al., 2003, 2006), we found that the
worms consumed less oxygen. Collectively, our results sug-
gest that growing worms in plastic culture bags does pose a
challenge to worm experiment viability. The use of CeMM
rather than OP50 as a food source may therefore reduce the
oxygen exchange requirement and thus increase the viability
of worm experiments conducted inside plastic culture bags
on the ISS, but this comes with the added challenge that
CeMM is more prone to become contaminated.
Regardless, it remains clear that proper ground testing is
required preﬂight despite past successful C.elegans spaceﬂight
experiments. Additionally, in contrast to challenges with ex-
perimental bags and gas exchange, the development of new
ECs, similarly dependent on effective surface area to volume
ratios, presented no problems. Gas exchange in the ECs was
capable of producing a viable experiment. This result suggests
that for future experiments it is likely that gas exchange be-
tween the C. elegans culture and ISS will be limited principally
by the exchange properties of the culture bags and not the ECs.
The second most challenging portion of our preﬂight
testing was testing and ﬁnalizing suitable scenarios for upload
to the ISS that were consistent both with current operational
realities and with successfully conducting our experiment.
The data on durations from payload handover until integra-
tion on the ISS provided us with a realistic range of upload
timings and should prove useful for others planning to upload
via Dragon with NASA cold stowage.
Using these timings, we were able to establish that a
C. elegans payload can be kept in a stasis during cold upload
at 8–12C, then subsequently grow and reproduce effectively.
Of note, while the use of phase change material removed the
need for active temperature control during upload, it was
critical that we tested the performance of the phase change
material temperature proﬁle. Indeed, for biologically active
cultures, phase change material provides a signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent temperature proﬁle than active temperature control.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have updated the ﬂight hardware and
upload conditions available to support C. elegans experi-
ments onboard the ISS. These validations provide a platform
for MME and future investigators to successfully, and efﬁ-
ciently, conduct experiments onboard the ISS.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the UK Space Agency,
ESA, JAXA, and BIOTESC for their support of the Mole-
cular Muscle Experiment.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
Funding Information
This work was supported by the BBSRC (Grant Nos.
BB/N015894/1, BB/P025781/1); the UK Space Agency
and the STFC (Grant No. ST/R005737/1); and ESA (des-
ignations Molecular Muscle Experiment and ESA-14-
ISLRA_Prop-0029). J.E.H. and S.A.V. were supported by
the
National
Aeronautics
and
Space
Administration
(NASA) (NNX15AL16G to S.A.V.). Some strains were
provided by the CGC, which is funded by NIH Ofﬁce of
Research Infrastructure Programs (P40 OD010440).
References
Corsi, A.K., Wightman, B., and Chalﬁe, M. (2015) A trans-
parent window into biology: a primer on Caenorhabditis
elegans. Genetics 200:387–407.
Demontis, G.C., Germani, M.M., Caiani, E.G., Barravecchia, I.,
Passino, C., and Angeloni, D. (2017) Human pathophysio-
logical adaptations to the space environment. Front Physiol
8:547.
Fitts, R.H., Trappe, S.W., Costill, D.L., Gallagher, P.M., Creer,
A.C., Colloton, P.A., Peters, J.R., Romatowski, J.G., Bain,
J.L., and Riley, D.A. (2010) Prolonged space ﬂight-induced
alterations in the structure and function of human skeletal
muscle ﬁbres. J Physiol 588:3567–3592.
Gaffney, C.J., Bass, J.J., Barratt, T.F., and Szewczyk, N.J.
(2014) Methods to assess subcellular compartments of muscle
in C. elegans. J Vis Exp e52043. doi:10.3791/52043.
Gaffney, C.J., Fomina, E., Babich, D., Kitov, V., Uskov, K., and
Green, D.A. (2017) The effect of long-term conﬁnement and
the efﬁcacy of exercise countermeasures on muscle strength
during a simulated mission to Mars: data from the Mars500
study. Sport Med Open 3:40.
Gaffney, C.J., Pollard, A., Barratt, T.F., Constantin-Teodosiu,
D., Greenhaff, P.L., and Szewczyk, N.J. (2018a) Greater loss
of mitochondrial function with ageing is associated with
earlier onset of sarcopenia in C. elegans. Aging (Albany. NY)
10:3382–3396.
Gaffney, C.J., Pollard, A., Deane, C., Cooke, M., Balsamo, M.,
Hewitt, J., Vanapalli, S., Szewczyk, N., Etheridge, T., and
Phillips, B. (2018b) Worms in space for outreach on earth:
Space Life Science activities for the classroom. Gravit Space
Res 6:74–82.
Hewitt, J.E., Pollard, A.K., Lesanpezeshki, L., Deane, C.S.,
Gaffney, C.J., Etheridge, T., Szewczyk, N.J., and Vanapalli,
S.A. (2018) Muscle strength deﬁciency and mitochondrial
dysfunction in a muscular dystrophy model of Caenorhabditis
elegans and its functional response to drugs. Dis Model Mech
11:dmm036137.
Higashibata, A., Hashizume, T., Nemoto, K., Higashitani, N.,
Etheridge, T., Mori, C., Harada, S., Sugimoto, T., Szewczyk,
N.J., Baba, S.A., Mogami, Y., Fukui, K., and Higashitani, A.
(2016) Microgravity elicits reproducible alterations in cy-
toskeletal and metabolic gene and protein expression in
space-ﬂown Caenorhabditis elegans. NPJ Microgravity 2:
15022.
Higashitani, A., Hashizume, T., Sugimoto, T., Mori, C., Ne-
moto, K., Etheridge, T., Higashitani, N., Takanami, T., Su-
zuki, H., Fukui, K., Yamazaki, T., Ishioka, N., Szewczyk, N.,
and Higashibata, A. (2009) C. elegans RNAi space experi-
ment (CERISE) in Japanese Experiment Module KIBO. Biol
Sci Space 23:183–187.
Honda, Y., Higashibata, A., Matsunaga, Y., Yonezawa, Y., Ka-
wano, T., Higashitani, A., Kuriyama, K., Shimazu, T., Tanaka,
M., Szewczyk, N.J., Ishioka, N., and Honda, S. (2012) Genes
down-regulated in spaceﬂight are involved in the control of
longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci Rep 2:487.
942
POLLARD ET AL.

Honda, Y., Honda, S., Narici, M., and Szewczyk, N.J. (2014)
Spaceﬂight and ageing: reﬂecting on Caenorhabditis elegans
in space. Gerontology 60:138–142.
Ishioka, N., and Higashibata, A. (2019) Space experiments
using C. elegans as a model organism. Handbook of Space
Pharmaceuticals, 1–32. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-50909-9_3-1.
Kaletta, T., and Hengartner, M.O. (2006) Finding function in
novel targets: C. elegans as a model organism. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 5:387–399.
Koopman, M., Michels, H., Dancy, B.M., Kamble, R., Mouchir-
oud, L., Auwerx, J., Nollen, E.A., and Houtkooper, R.H.
(2016) A screening-based platform for the assessment of
cellular respiration in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Protoc 11:
1798–1816.
Oczypok, E.A., Etheridge, T., Freeman, J., Stodieck, L., Johnsen,
R., Baillie, D., and Szewczyk, N.J. (2012) Remote automated
multi-generational growth and observation of an animal in low
Earth orbit. J R Soc Interface 9:596–599.
Selch, F., Higashibata, A., Imamizo-Sato, M., Higashitani, A.,
Ishioka, N., Szewczyk, N.J., and Conley, C.A. (2008) Genomic
response of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to space-
ﬂight. Adv Sp Res 41:807–815.
Shen, P., Yue, Y., Zheng, J., and Park, Y. (2018) Cae-
norhabditis elegans: a convenient in vivo model for assessing
the impact of food bioactive compounds on obesity, aging,
and Alzheimer’s disease. Annu Rev Food Sci Technol 9:1–22.
Simpson, R.J., Kunz, H., Agha, N., and Graff, R. (2015) Ex-
ercise and the regulation of immune functions. Prog Mol Biol
Transl Sci 135:355–380.
Strollo, F., Gentile, S., Strollo, G., Mambro, A., and Vernikos,
J. (2018) Recent progress in space physiology and aging.
Front Physiol 9:1551.
Szewczyk, N.J., Kozak, E., and Conley, C.A. (2003) Chemi-
cally deﬁned medium and Caenorhabditis elegans. BMC
Biotechnol 3:19.
Szewczyk, N.J., Mancinelli, R.L., McLamb, W., Reed, D.,
Blumberg, B.S., and Conley, C.A. (2005) Caenorhabditis
elegans survives atmospheric breakup of STS-107, Space
Shuttle Columbia. Astrobiology 5:690–705.
Szewczyk, N.J., Udranszky, I.A., Kozak, E., Sunga, J., Kim,
S.K., Jacobson, L.A., and Conley, C.A. (2006) Delayed de-
velopment and lifespan extension as features of metabolicli-
festyle alteration in C. elegans under dietary restriction. J Exp
Biol 209:4129–4139.
Szewczyk, N.J., Tillman, J., Conley, C.A., Granger, L., Segalat,
L., Higashitani, A., Honda, S., Honda, Y., Kagawa, H.,
Adachi, R., Higashibata, A., Fujimoto, N., Kuriyama K.,
Ishioka, N., Fukui K., Baillie, D., Rose, A., Gasset, G., Eche,
B., Chaput, D., and Viso. M. (2008) Description of interna-
tional Caenorhabditis elegans experiment ﬁrst ﬂight (ICE-
FIRST). Adv Sp Res 42:1072–1079.
Trappe, S., Costill, D., Gallagher, P., Creer, A., Peters, J.R.,
Evans, H., Riley, D.A., and Fitts, R.H. (2009) Exercise in
space: human skeletal muscle after 6 months aboard the
International Space Station. J Appl Physiol 106:1159–
1168.
Vassy, J., Portet, S., Beil, M., Millot, G., Fauvel-Lafeve, F.,
Karniguian, A., Gasset, G., Irinopoulou, T., Calvo, F., Rigaut,
J.P., and Schoevaert, D. (2001) The effect of weightlessness
on cytoskeleton architecture and proliferation of human
breast cancer cell line MCF-7. FASEB J 15:1104–1106.
Warren, P., Golden, A., Hanover, J., Love, D., Shephard, F., and
Szewczyk, N.J. (2013) Evaluation of the ﬂuids mixing en-
closure system for life science experiments during a com-
mercial Caenorhabditis elegans spaceﬂight experiment. Adv
Space Res 51:2241–2250.
Zhang, L., Gualberto, D.G., Guo, X., Correa, P., Jee, C., and
Garcia, L.R. (2015) TMC-1 attenuates C. elegans develop-
ment and sexual behaviour in a chemically deﬁned food en-
vironment. Nat Commun 6:6345.
Address correspondence to:
Nathaniel J. Szewczyk
MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal
Ageing Research
NIHR Nottingham BRC
University of Nottingham
Medical School Royal Derby Hospital
Derby DE22 3DT
United Kingdom
E-mail: nate@alumni.cmu.edu
Submitted 18 October 2019
Accepted 3 March 2020
Associate Editor: Petra Rettberg
Abbreviations Used
CeMM ¼ C. elegans maintenance media
ECs ¼ experiment cassettes
ESA ¼ European Space Agency
FEP ¼ ﬂuorinated ethylene propylene
ISS ¼ International Space Station
JAXA ¼ Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency
MELFI ¼ Minus Eighty Laboratory Freezer for ISS
MME ¼ Molecular Muscle Experiment
OCR ¼ oxygen consumption rates
PE ¼ polyethylene
MME GROUND VALIDATION
943
