Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024  |  1155
Article
Molecular and physiological changes in the 
SpaceX Inspiration4 civilian crew
Christopher W. Jones1,25, Eliah G. Overbey2,3,4,5,25, Jerome Lacombe6,7,25, Adrian J. Ecker1, 
Cem Meydan2,3,4, Krista Ryon2,3,4, Braden Tierney2,3,4, Namita Damle2,3,4, Matthew MacKay2,3,4, 
Evan E. Afshin2,3,4, Jonathan Foox2,3,4, Jiwoon Park2,3, Theodore M. Nelson8, Mir Suhail Mohamad9, 
Syed Gufran Ahmad Byhaqui9, Burhan Aslam9, Ummer Akbar Tali9, Liaqun Nisa9,  
Priya V. Menon9, Chintan O. Patel9, Sharib A. Khan9, Doug J. Ebert10, Aaron Everson10, 
Michael C. Schubert11, Nabila N. Ali11, Mallika S. Sarma11, JangKeun Kim2,3, Nadia Houerbi2,3, 
Kirill Grigorev2,3, J. Sebastian Garcia Medina2,3, Alexander J. Summers6, Jian Gu6,7, 
John A. Altin12, Ali Fattahi6, Mohammad I. Hirzallah13,14, Jimmy H. Wu14,15, Alexander C. Stahn1, 
Afshin Beheshti16,17, Remi Klotz18, Veronica Ortiz18, Min Yu18, Laura Patras19,20, Irina Matei19,21, 
David Lyden19,21, Ari Melnick2, Neil Banerjee22, Sean Mullane22, Ashley S. Kleinman2,3, 
Michael Loesche22, Anil S. Menon23, Dorit B. Donoviel14,15, Emmanuel Urquieta14,15, 
Jaime Mateus22, Ashot E. Sargsyan10, Mark Shelhamer11, Frederic Zenhausern6,7,12,24, 
Eric M. Bershad13,14, Mathias Basner1,26 ✉ & Christopher E. Mason2,3,4,26 ✉
Human spaceflight has historically been managed by government agencies, such 
as in the NASA Twins Study1, but new commercial spaceflight opportunities have 
opened spaceflight to a broader population. In 2021, the SpaceX Inspiration4 mission 
launched the first all-civilian crew to low Earth orbit, which included the youngest 
American astronaut (aged 29), new in-flight experimental technologies (handheld 
ultrasound imaging, smartwatch wearables and immune profiling), ocular alignment 
measurements and new protocols for in-depth, multi-omic molecular and cellular 
profiling. Here we report the primary findings from the 3-day spaceflight mission, 
which induced a broad range of physiological and stress responses, neurovestibular 
changes indexed by ocular misalignment, and altered neurocognitive functioning, 
some of which match those of long-term spaceflight2, but almost all of which did  
not differ from baseline (pre-flight) after return to Earth. Overall, these preliminary 
civilian spaceflight data suggest that short-duration missions do not pose a 
significant health risk, and moreover present a rich opportunity to measure the 
earliest phases of adaptation to spaceflight in the human body at anatomical, 
cellular, physiological and cognitive levels. Finally, these methods and results lay  
the foundation for an open, rapidly expanding biomedical database for astronauts3, 
which can inform countermeasure development for both private and government- 
sponsored space missions.
Orbital human spaceflight missions have historically flown highly 
screened and extensively trained cohorts of astronauts, with limited 
public data available for follow-up analyses. However, with the emer-
gence of private space programmes and broadening access to orbital 
missions, new opportunities for research and discovery have emerged 
for civilian engagement with spaceflight. Specifically, SpaceX has now 
launched or announced several privately supported missions, includ-
ing the all-civilian Inspiration4 mission and the Polaris Dawn series of 
missions (including on Starship). These missions enable a broader 
representation of astronaut cohorts, spanning a wider range of ages 
(for example, the youngest American astronaut, Hayley Arceneaux), 
balanced representation of sexes, diverse genetic and medical back-
grounds, as well as opportunities for new science, technology, art and 
public engagement during their missions.
Here we present findings from the human research experiments 
performed on SpaceX’s first all-civilian private spaceflight, Inspiration4, 
which launched from Kennedy Space Center on 15 September 2021, on 
the SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule. This orbital class mission reached 
590.6 km in altitude; the farthest distance crewed orbital missions have 
been into space since the Gemini programme. Although the crew spent 
only 3 days in low Earth orbit, they experienced similar hazards of space-
flight as International Space Station (ISS) missions (often 6–12 months 
in duration), including radiation exposure, sustained microgravity, the 
closed and hostile environment of space, isolation and confinement, 
and long distance from Earth resources2. Thus, the Inspiration4 mission, 
and similar missions, provide a platform to study these acute exposures 
endemic to low Earth orbit, with unique data collection opportunities 
in the earliest phase of the human body’s response to spaceflight.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07648-x
Received: 3 February 2023
Accepted: 3 June 2024
Published online: 11 June 2024
Open access
 Check for updates
A list of affiliations appears at the end of the paper.

1156  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024
Article
The three main objectives of the research projects deployed on the 
Inspiration4 mission were to (1) evaluate the feasibility of collecting 
biological and behavioural data in an all-civilian crew throughout 
pre-flight, in-flight and post-flight phases of the spaceflight mission, 
(2) examine the biological and behavioural responses of the crew to 
short-duration orbital spaceflight and (3) build the foundation for a 
biomedical database and enable access to these biomedical data from 
the crew and mission. The Inspiration4 mission provided a unique 
opportunity to test the feasibility of medical research aboard a com-
mercial spaceflight mission crewed by non-professional astronauts, as 
well as new clinical and research protocols, which spanned a wide range 
of assays and experiments (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary 
Table 1). Specifically, the Multimodal Evaluation of Spaceflight Health 
protocol for the Inspiration4 mission from the Translational Research 
Institute for Space Health (TRISH) funded multiple investigators to 
conduct separate yet related investigations on the Inspiration4 mis-
sion, and deployed a battery of tests to understand some of the major 
effects of short-duration spaceflight on humans, including portable 
ultrasound measurements, cognitive and sensorimotor tests, sur-
veys, physiological data collected with a smartwatch and blood/saliva 
testing. Moreover, a comprehensive Space Omics and Medical Atlas 
(SOMA) protocol, based on the NASA Twins Study1, was used to meas-
ure multi-omic, clinical and immune profiles in whole blood, serum, 
plasma, saliva and biopsied skin samples. In this Article, we present and 
discuss the key findings from studies evaluating the Inspiration4 crew’s 
comprehensive multi-omics analyses of biospecimens, ultrasound 
imaging, otolith function, cardiovascular physiology and cognitive 
performance, which together enable an in-depth biomedical research 
approach for private crews on upcoming missions and unprecedented 
access to these data and samples.
Multi-omic profiling of the Inspiration4 crew
Building upon established omics, sample pipelines and analytic meth-
ods from the NASA Twins Study1, we collected samples for an integrative 
multi-omics analysis of the Inspiration4 crew (Extended Data Fig. 2). 
This included biospecimens collected before launch (L) pre-flight 
(L − 92, L − 44 and L − 3), in-flight (flight days (FDs) FD1, FD2 and FD3) 
and post-flight following return (R) to Earth (R + 1, R + 45, R + 82 and 
R + 194). Blood, saliva, skin swabs, skin biopsies and capsule swabs 
were collected (Extended Data Fig. 2), followed by a battery of assays 
to collect multi-omic measurements, including spatially resolved tran-
scriptomics, whole-genome sequencing (WGS), direct RNA sequenc-
ing, combined single-nuclei RNA sequencing/single-nuclei assay for 
transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq), T cell 
receptor immune repertoire sequencing, B cell receptor immune rep-
ertoire sequencing, proteomics (liquid chromatography with tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)), metabolomics (LC–MS/MS), a clonal 
haematopoiesis panel, cell-free DNA and cell-free RNA sequencing 
from plasma, shotgun metagenomics and shotgun metatranscriptom-
ics (Methods and Extended Data Fig. 2). Also, clinical measurements 
were obtained and included complete blood count, a comprehensive 
metabolic panel, a CLIA-grade (Clinical Laboratory Improvement 
Amendments) WGS and pharmacogenomics profile, a cardiovascular 
biomarker panel and cytokine/chemokine panel assays (Fig. 1, Extended 
Data Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 2).
These data revealed a broad set of molecular changes across multiple 
layers of biology (Fig. 1), and each specific omics dataset was examined 
in depth across several Inspiration4 companion papers. First, epigenet-
ics data from single-nuclei chromatin (single-nuclei ATAC-seq) profil-
ing showed more than 70,000 peaks per sample, which were enriched 
for genes involved in DNA repair, immune activation and nucleosome 
organization4,5, notably matching results from the NASA Twins Study1. 
Second, telomere elongation was observed for all crew members, 
but all other metrics of genome stability, sequence divergence and 
clonal haematopoiesis were unchanged6. Third, we observed an aver-
age of 668 metabolites and more than 4,000 proteins per sample in 
plasma, which was smaller than the 637 proteins per sample in the 
exosome population, yet the exosome proteomic data revealed unique, 
brain-associated peptides7. Fourth, direct RNA nanopore sequencing 
showed a mean of 13,022 transcripts per sample, plus a significant spike 
in methyl-6-adenine (m6A) levels on the day of landing, R + 1 (ref. 8); 
this was complemented with a range of 18,632–29,900 genes detected 
across all single-nucleus RNA sequencing data. Fifth, we characterized 
the spatial biopsies of the crew samples with GeoMx, which revealed a 
mean of 16,433 genes per section, with evidence of disrupted inflamma-
tion in pathways near the surface of the skin9. Finally, we examined the 
microbiome of the crew, using shotgun metagenomics and metatran-
scriptomics before, during and after spaceflight, and we found a spike 
in virus abundance in-flight, as well as 3.6 million non-redundant genes 
at 90% identity, 1,287 metagenomic assembled genomes and 1,544 
assembled viral genomes10.
Immune reactivity analysis
The primary objective of the virome-wide antibody project was to 
assess immunological responses, including those that could be asso-
ciated with viral reactivation, during short-duration spaceflight, as a 
multitude of evidence has demonstrated perturbation of the immune 
system (for example, decreased cellular immunity, dysregulation of 
T cell function and cytokine production) and reactivation of latent 
viruses during both short-duration (for example, space shuttle) 
and long-duration ISS missions11–14. Therefore, we generated virome 
reactivity profiles of the Inspiration4 crew across mission phases, 
leveraging a highly multiplexed assay (‘PepSeq’) that measures 
immunoglobulin G (IgG) reactivity to peptides representing the 
human virome15–17. PepSeq analysis using a previously described15 
15,000-peptide assay covering 80 human-infecting viral species 
showed that the reactivity profiles of dried blood spot samples col-
lected in-flight clustered with those of terrestrial samples from the 
corresponding astronauts (Fig. 2a), indicating that the collection and 
storage of samples during flight did not adversely affect their quality. 
The time-invariant reactivity profiles of the four astronauts included 
reactivity to 45 species (Supplementary Table 3) and were dominated 
by reactivity to peptides from respiratory viruses and Epstein–Barr 
virus13,18, as expected (Fig. 2a).
To detect species-specific antibody changes during the sampling 
period, we conducted a peptide set enrichment analysis19 to compare 
all pairs of consecutive time points for each virus species (Fig. 2b). We 
detected a total of n = 8 such events (defined as significant reactivity 
increases); the largest number corresponded to Epstein–Barr virus 
(n = 4), a virus previously reported to be reactive in astronauts during 
short-duration spaceflight13,18. The remainder were species associ-
ated with common upper respiratory infections: Rhinoviruses A and C 
(n = 2 and n = 1, respectively) and Adenovirus C (n = 1). The Epstein–Barr 
virus events included changing reactivity that overlapped with flight 
for astronauts C001 and C002 during flight (Fig. 2b), although these 
specific viruses were not found in the sequence data (Fig. 1). These 
combined analyses indicate that changing immunity to viruses can 
be detected during spaceflight, even under conditions where no viral 
symptoms or replication are detected, which has been previously docu-
mented in astronauts during longer missions14.
Point-of-care sampling and analysis
In addition to the viral and immune profiles, the Inspiration4 crew 
also tested a paper-based multiplexed microgravity-adapted vertical 
flow immunoassay (0g-VFI) (Methods and Extended Data Fig. 3a–c) to 
detect plasma immunoglobulin M (IgM) and C-reactive protein (CRP) 
in-flight via gold nanoparticle-conjugated antibodies. Assessment of 

Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024  |  1157
cross-reactivity and specificity showed no significant non-specific 
binding, with a minimal background sometimes visible for IgM 
(Extended Data Fig. 3d). The limit of detection for CRP and IgM was 
0.01 and 0.7 µg ml−1, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 4a). The intra- 
and interassay coefficients of variation were less than 20% (Extended 
Data Fig. 4b), and the presence of some high-level outliers was the 
result of a low spatial distribution homogeneity that was compen-
sated by measurement repeatability (Extended Data Fig. 4c). Post-flight 
examination of the 0g-VFI showed that absorbing pads displayed a 
marked area, suggesting that an average of 80 µl of fluid crossed the 
membrane, thus highlighting both that fluid displacement occurred 
in the microgravity environment and that it was correctly used by the 
Inspiration4 crew (Extended Data Fig. 3e). Finally, the analysis of 0g-VFI 
membranes showed that no IgM or CRP were detected for the devices 
run in space following standard protocol (15 min incubation) by the 
crew (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Unused kits stored in the Dragon capsule 
were run post-flight on Earth and did not display any changes either. 
Furthermore, control kits stored on Earth with hygroscopic compounds 
for the same period (that is, the duration of the flight experiment) and 
run for 15 min also showed strong intensity, suggesting the need to 
maintain low humidity levels during storage. Accelerated stability stud-
ies conducted in an environmental chamber at 42 °C and 75% humidity 
confirmed the effect of desiccation on VFI performance, with a more 
than 8-fold decrease in intensity after storage without a hygroscopic 
compound (Extended Data Fig. 5).
Ultrasound imaging of the Inspiration4 crew
Traditional imaging equipment and techniques, while established 
aboard the ISS, may not be afforded in resource-constrained missions 
due to their size and resource dependence. The Inspiration4 mission 
featured the first in-flight research use of Butterfly iQ+, a handheld 
single-probe ultrasound device for urinary bladder, internal jugular 
vein (IJV) and eye imaging in full crew autonomy (Fig. 3). Aims for all tar-
gets included both the assessment of physiological changes in response 
to spaceflight and evaluation of autonomous procedure efficacy. 
Eighty-nine imaging instances (multiframe cine of varied length) were 
collected pre-flight, and 108 imaging instances were collected in-flight, 
Crew ID
C003
C004
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
No. of genes
detected
0
50,000
0
200
400
600
800
0
200
400
600
No. of metabolites
detected
No. of peaks
detected
•  PBMC single-nuclei gene expression
•  Single-nuclei chromatin accessibility
•  Plasma proteomics
•  EVP proteomics
•  Plasma metabolomics
Time points
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
DNA
Protein
•  Whole-blood bulk gene expression
•  Whole-blood m6A mRNA modiﬁcations
•  Skin spatially-resolved gene expression
No. of proteins
detected
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
0
10,000
20,000
No. of transcripts
detected
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
No. of m6A
sites detected
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
R + 194
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
R + 194
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
L – 44
R + 1
Microbial
•  Skin and env. swab bacterial species
0
500
1,000
1,500
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
0
10
20
30
No. of species
detected
No. of genera detected
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
FD2
FD3
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
FD2
FD3
L – 92
L – 44
L – 3
R + 1
R + 45
R + 82
FD2
FD3
•  cfDNA sequencing
•  WGS
•  Telomere elongation
•  Clonal haematopoiesis
Time points
•  T cell/B cell immune repertoire proﬁling
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
R + 194
100,000
150,000
No. of proteins
detected
Time points
RNA
Time points
C001
C002
No. of genes
detected
No. of species
detected
•  Skin and env. swab fungal species
•  Skin and env. swab viral species
Fig. 1 | Multi-omic changes across the Inspiration4 mission. Hundreds of 
thousands of multi-omic measurements were generated across multiple 
sample types. From DNA, single-nuclei chromatin accessibility, WGS, cell-free 
DNA (cfDNA) sequencing, telomere length and clonal haematopoiesis were 
measured. From RNA, whole blood gene expression, whole blood m6A 
modifications, peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) single-nuclei RNA 
sequencing, skin spatially resolved gene expression and T cell and B cell 
immune repertoire profiling were performed. For proteins, plasma 
proteomics, extracellular vesicles and particles (EVP) proteomics and plasma 
metabolomics were quantified. Additionally, from microbial skin and 
environmental (Env.) swabs, bacterial, fungal and viral species were measured.

1158  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024
Article
yielding an average of 27 instances per astronaut (range = 18–32 
instances). Bladder imaging success scores were above the usability 
threshold (2.33 ± 0.24 (s.d.); range = 2.0–2.5; Methods), demonstrating 
the effectiveness of the imaging system and the instructions for urinary 
bladder volume assessments (Fig. 3b). However, these image sets did 
not reveal significant physiological trends, possibly due to variability 
between the small number of astronauts and crew-reported operational 
constraints affecting the timing of data acquisition relative to voiding. 
The bilateral IJV images were the highest in quality (2.36 ± 0.51 (s.d.); 
range = 1.8–2.9) and thus amenable to quantification and analysis. The 
in-flight image sets from ocular imaging (the most intricate procedure) 
consistently scored below the usability threshold in all four astronauts 
(0.76 ± 0.51 (s.d.; range = 0.0–1.1); the mean ocular success score was 
lower than both the bladder and IJV success scores, which were of similar 
quality. Therefore, ocular imaging data were deemed inadequate for 
quantification of microgravity-induced structural changes.
The IJV imaging protocol was similar to the protocol described in 
ref. 20, which was designed to measure bilateral IJV cross-sectional areas 
(CSAs) and flow velocities, and can be used to identify anomalies, such 
as thrombi, loss of flow spontaneity, flow reversal and spontaneous 
C004
C001
C002
C003
Terrestrial
Flight
a
b
C001 
C002 
C003 
C004
Time relative to ﬂight (days)
Terrestrial
Flight
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
HHV-4 
(EBV)
HRV-A
HAdV-C
HRV-C
Interval with increasing reactivity
Interval with decreasing reactivity
Collection:
HHV-1
NV 
SARS-CoV-2 
HRV3
HHV-7
HHV-5 
HAdV-B
HAdV-D 
HHV-6 
HOPV
RV-A
HRV-A
HRV-B
EV-C
EV-A
EV-D
Others
HRV-C
EV-B
HHV-4
HAdV-C
Fig. 2 | Virome-wide antibody analysis of blood samples self-collected 
during short-duration spaceflight. Blood spot samples were collected 
longitudinally across all mission phases from the four Inspiration4 astronauts 
and analysed for IgG reactivity across a 15,000-plex peptide library representing 
80 human-infecting viral species using the PepSeq assay. a, Reactivity for each 
sample (columns) is shown across all 1,490 peptides (rows) reactive in at least 
one astronaut, with samples clustered by the similarity of their reactivity 
profiles and peptides grouped by the virus species from which they were 
designed. Sample reactivity profiles clustered tightly within each astronaut, 
including those collected in-flight. Reactivity was detected against peptides 
from a total of 45 virus species, listed in Supplemental Table 3, including full 
names. b, Time intervals with significantly increasing (red) or decreasing (blue) 
IgG reactivity in the four astronauts, detected using Peptide Set Enrichment 
Analysis19 (Methods). Shown are the four virus species for which at least one 
significant increase was detected with the six sampling time points indicated 
by vertical tick marks at the top of the plot. EBV, Epstein–Barr virus; EV-A, 
Enterovirus A; EV-B, Enterovirus B; EV-C, Enterovirus C; EV-D, Enterovirus D; 
HAdV-B, Human mastadenovirus B; HAdV-C, Human mastadenovirus C; 
HAdV-D, Human mastadenovirus D; HHV-1, Human alphaherpesvirus 1; HHV-4, 
Human gammaherpesvirus 4; HHV-5, Human betaherpesvirus 5; HHV-6, 
 Human betaherpesvirus 6; HHV-7, Human betaherpesvirus 7; HOPV, Human 
orthopneumovirus; HRV3, Human respirovirus 3; HRV-A, Rhinovirus A; HRV-B, 
Rhinovirus B; HRV-C, Rhinovirus C; NV, Norwalk virus; RV-A, Rotavirus; 
SARS-CoV-2, Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Bladder
IJV
Eye
Success score (0–3)
Mean
C001
C002
C003
C004
b
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
GND
GND
ITD
FLT
FLT
ITD
IJV CSA (cm2)
P = 0.13
P = 0.09
d
a
c
Instructions:
view 2 acquisition
in color doppler
Hold probe in place,
make two ~6-second
cine-loops 
Move color box if
needed to cover the IJV
7
8
Tap Actions
5
Tap Color Doppler
6
Maintain same View 2
Maintain View 2:
IJV across
the screen
Colour box covers
the IJV 
Fig. 3 | Imaging-based experiments. a, Payload: Butterfly iQ+ ultrasound 
system and ResQGARD ITD7 used for physiological intervention. b, Summary 
plot of image quality assessment. For each image acquired, imaging success 
scores were calculated based on anatomical accuracy and technical quality 
(Methods). The mean success score for each astronaut is plotted as an 
individual data point, and grey-dotted bars represent the grand mean ± s.d. of 
astronaut success scores for each anatomical target; n = 4 astronauts, n = 14 
bladder images, n = 73 IJV images and n = 19 eye images. Eye imaging success 
scores were different than bladder and IJV scores per one-way ANOVA and post 
hoc Tukey’s honest significant difference. c, A sample page from the JIT 
instructions for flow spontaneity assessment. d, CSA of the right IJV pre-flight 
in the supine position (GND) and in-flight (FLT), with and without ITD 
breathing. Pre-flight data were derived from a single imaging instance per 
astronaut, while in-flight data were averaged across in-flight instances within 
each astronaut (range = 1–3 imaging instances); mean IJV CSA for each astronaut 
is presented for each condition, along with the grand mean ± s.d. The difference 
between grand means for each IJV CSA assessment pre-flight (GND) and in-flight 
(FLT) is visualized with a black dashed linear trend line; n = 4 astronauts, n = 4 
GND images, n = 4 GND ITD images, n = 8 FLT images and n = 7 FLT ITD images. 
No differences between pre-flight (GND) and in-flight (FLT) were found 
evaluated using paired, two-tailed Student’s t-tests with a significance 
threshold of α < 0.05.

Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024  |  1159
echo contrast development21,22 (Fig. 3c). In contrast to long-duration 
ISS cohorts20,22 and regardless of flight day (FD1–3), both IJVs were 
free from thrombi and flow anomalies in all Inspiration4 astronauts. 
Spontaneous antegrade flow was demonstrated in all examined IJVs by 
colour and (or) spectral Doppler and no spontaneous echo contrast was 
detected. While previous studies of astronauts in both short-duration 
(less than 7 days) and long-duration spaceflight have demonstrated 
a stable increase in IJV CSA20,23,24, the absence of flow anomalies and 
spontaneous echo contrast in all four astronauts suggests a poten-
tial difference from respective long-duration spaceflight data and 
the possibility of lower risk of IJV thrombosis in the early period of 
microgravity exposure. The effect of inspiratory resistance breathing 
using an impedance threshold device (ITD) on IJV filling (reflected as 
CSA) appeared more pronounced on the right side, but varied among 
astronauts and did not reach statistical significance (Fig. 3d, t-test, 
P values > 0.05). Notably, the measurements were concordant among 
astronauts pre-flight and in-flight (Fig. 3d), indicating reliable data col-
lection and encouraging further inquiries into the potential of ITD-like 
interventions as a countermeasure against thrombosis in cases of clini-
cal concern with commensurate flow anomalies.
Otolith asymmetry and motion sickness
The neurovestibular system is adversely affected by the microgravity 
environment of space through altered neural processing and transduc-
tion of sensory measurements25,26. The otolith organs are an integral 
component of the neurovestibular system that transduce sensory 
effects, particularly linear acceleration and gravity. Any normal asym-
metry between otoliths on the two sides of the head is compensated 
for by central neural processes on Earth27; however, this compensa-
tion is inappropriate in microgravity, which can lead to vertical and 
torsional ocular misalignment. This asymmetry (as manifest in ocular 
misalignment) has also been associated with increased susceptibility 
to space motion sickness (SMS)25. Ocular alignment was assessed in 
the Inspiration4 crew, as a proximal measure of otolith asymmetry, 
during the pre-flight and post-flight phases using a computerized test 
that measured vertical (vertical alignment nulling (VAN)) and torsional 
(torsional alignment nulling (TAN)) ocular misalignment. VAN and 
TAN data collected on the Inspiration4 crew showed no consistent and 
systematic effects of spaceflight from pre-flight to post-flight. VAN, 
however, exhibited different patterns between astronauts who expe-
rienced SMS in-flight compared to those who did not (Fig. 4). Two of 
the four Inspiration4 crew (50%) experienced SMS, which is consistent 
with earlier reports that 50–67% of astronauts experience SMS during 
short-duration spaceflight28,29. Astronauts who did not experience SMS 
(Fig. 4a,c) exhibited consistent vertical misalignment both pre-flight 
and post-flight, and that misalignment was different after the flight 
than before the flight. This is presumably because post-flight testing 
reflects the in-flight adaptive state, and that 0g-adapted state should, 
in general, be different from the 1g state (P values < 0.001; Supple-
mentary Table 4 and Extended Data Fig. 6). A statistical evaluation of 
the proposed interpretation of SMS susceptibility was developed to 
validate these observations (Supplementary Information).
Cardiovascular responses to spaceflight
While some wearable devices have previously flown in other spaceflight 
missions, crew of the Inspiration4 mission used Apple Watches, which 
feature a rich set of biometrics that can be collected on astronauts and 
have the potential to be useful in future missions. Astronaut cardiovas-
cular physiology was measured with the Series 6 Apple Watch, which 
astronauts donned on FD2 and wore for an average of 1.3 ± 0.1 days 
in-flight (Extended Data Fig. 1). Significant changes across mission 
phases were observed for crew heart rate (Extended Data Fig. 7a,e) 
and heart rate variability (HRV; Fig. 5d and Extended Data Fig. 7b,f), 
and differential heart rate changes between astronauts were also 
observed (F = 9.46, P < 0.0001). Studies of heart rate in spaceflight 
have yielded mixed findings30, and relative to pre-flight, only C004 
exhibited decreased heart rate (Supplementary Table 5), as well as 
increased HRV (Fig. 5d). These cardiovascular changes in C004 were 
accompanied by lower blood oxygen saturation in-flight (Extended 
Data Fig. 7c,g), yet post-flight measures of cardiovascular function 
did not differ from baseline (pre-flight) upon return to Earth. Consist-
ent with earlier studies31, increased heart rate post-flight, relative to 
pre-flight, was observed for two astronauts, C001 and C002; C001 also 
exhibited elevated blood oxygen saturation levels post-flight. Further-
more, the crew exhibited substantially lower overall activity in-flight 
relative to pre-flight (F = 6.65, P < 0.0001), which was accompanied by 
reduced active energy expenditure (Extended Data Fig. 7d,h; F = 9.29, 
P = 0.0001); this reduced energy expenditure was driven by C001.
Some of the effects of spaceflight on astronaut physiology and 
behaviour can be attributed to the spacecraft environment32. The 
cabin environment was measured via sensors in the spacecraft, while 
sound pressure levels were measured using the Apple Watch. Environ-
mental variables fluctuated over time in-flight (Extended Data Fig. 8 
and Supplementary Table 5). The Inspiration4 crew were confined to 
the Dragon capsule, which has a volume of 9.3 m3, and were free to 
move about the cabin. The Dragon cabin environment is nominally 
controlled to 14.7 psi and 21% O2, in-flight O2 partial pressures aver-
aged 3.1 psia (range = 3.0–3.3 psia; equivalent to 20.4–22.4%) and 
CO2 averaged 0.8 mmHg (range = 0.4–2.0 mmHg). Temperature and 
humidity are controlled to maintain a comfortable short-sleeve envi-
ronment; the crew had the capability to adjust the temperature, which 
averaged 25.5 °C (range = 21.8–27.9 °C) in-flight. Relative humidity 
Pre 1
Pre 2
Post 1 Post 2
–4
–2
0
2
4
Misalignment (º)
Pre 1
Pre 2
Post 1 Post 2
–4
–2
0
2
4
Misalignment (º)
Pre 1
Pre 2
Post 1 Post 2
–4
–2
0
2
4
Misalignment (º)
Pre 1
Pre 2
Post 1 Post 2
–4
–2
0
2
4
Misalignment (º)
a
b
c
d
Fig. 4 | Ocular misalignment before and after short-duration spaceflight. 
a–d, The response of the neurovestibular system to short-duration spaceflight 
was indexed by ocular misalignment, as a proximal measure of otolith 
asymmetry. The degree of vertical ocular misalignment (VAN) is shown for 
each of the n = 4 astronauts as follows: C001 (a), C002* (b), C003 (c), C004* (d). 
An asterisk denotes astronauts who reported SMS in-flight; in these astronauts 
(C002 and C004), VAN scores were not significantly different post-flight 
relative to pre-flight. Each box represents one test session (n = 2 pre-flight and 
n = 2 post-flight, for each astronaut), in which 11 VAN trials were performed.  
The horizontal bar in each box represents the median of that dataset, the box 
encompasses the central 50% of the dataset and the whiskers indicate the 
minimum and maximum values that are not outliers (outliers, which are more 
than three scaled median absolute deviations from the median, are indicated 
by circles). Two-sample two-tailed t-tests were performed for each astronaut 
individually to determine consistency of pre-flight and post-flight measures, 
and significant differences (indicating spaceflight adaptation) between 
pre-flight and post-flight measures.

1160  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024
Article
could range between 25% and 75% (typically around 50%) and averaged 
29.9% (range = 27.3–52.3%). The Dragon environmental conditions were 
equivalent to those on the ISS, with O2 ranging from 2.8 psia to 3.0 psia, 
temperature ranging from 18 °C to 25 °C, relative humidity of 25–75% 
and a cabin pressure ranging from 3.8 psia to 14.9 psia. Aside from one 
period with high sound pressure levels in three astronauts post-flight, 
sound pressure levels were similar across mission phases; of note, the 
spacecraft produced around 50 dBA of background noise. Noise expo-
sure remained below the occupational 8 h exposure limit of 80 dBA 
for all but one data point (Extended Data Fig. 8e,g). In-flight, three of 
the four astronauts exhibited a significant and positive association 
between CO2 levels and higher HRV (Fig. 5f); however, other spacecraft 
environmental factors, including cabin pressure and temperature, did 
not exhibit consistent relationships with HRV.
The Inspiration4 crew’s neurobehavioural functions
Astronaut neurocognitive functioning and behavioural health are inte-
gral to the success of spaceflight missions. Astronauts performed the 
ten cognitive tests of NASA’s Cognition battery33 multiple times during 
each mission phase (Fig. 5a–c and Extended Data Fig. 1). Across cogni-
tive domains and as consistent with earlier work34, astronaut cognitive 
performance was largely unaffected by short-duration spaceflight (Sup-
plementary Table 6). Astronauts were, however, significantly slower 
on four cognition tests, and on three of them (psychomotor vigilance 
test, digit–symbol substitution task and motor praxis task assessing 
sustained attention, visual search and working memory and sensori-
motor speed, respectively), astronauts were also less accurate (albeit 
statistically significantly so for the motor praxis task only), suggesting 
*
**
**
**
*
*
****
*
C001
C003
C002
C004
**
*
*
*
**
*
Accuracy
Speed
Post- versus pre-ﬂight
In- versus pre-ﬂight
a
Cognition performance:
change in-ﬂight relative to pre-ﬂight
b
c
Alertness and mood survey:
changes relative to pre-ﬂight
d
Heart rate variability (ms)
e
CO2 (mmHg)
f
Heart rate variability (ms)
*
FD1
FD2
FD3
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Motor praxis
VOLT accuracy
F2B speed
F2B accuracy
AM speed
AM accuracy
LOT speed
LOT accuracy
ERT speed
ERT accuracy
MRT speed
MRT accuracy
DSST speed
DSST accuracy
BART speed
BART risk taking
PVT speed
PVT accuracy
ALL speed
ALL accuracy
z-score
–5
–3
–1
1
3
5
Sleep quality
High workload
Sleepiness
Unhappiness
Sickness
Physical
exhaustion
Stress
Depression
Boredom
Monotony
Points on 11-point scale
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Pre-ﬂight
In-ﬂight
Post-ﬂight
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
z-score
Accuracy
Speed
Cognition performance:
change post-ﬂight relative to pre-ﬂight
Time
CO2 (mmHg)
C001
C003
C002
C004
Motor praxis
VOLT accuracy
F2B speed
F2B accuracy
AM speed
AM accuracy
LOT speed
LOT accuracy
ERT speed
ERT accuracy
MRT speed
MRT accuracy
DSST speed
DSST accuracy
BART speed
BART risk taking
PVT speed
PVT accuracy
ALL speed
ALL accuracy
Fig. 5 | Behavioural and physiological responses to short-duration 
spaceflight. a,b, The standardized difference in accuracy (grey) and speed 
(green) of astronaut (n = 4) cognitive performance on the ten assays of the 
cognition test battery (n = 26 administrations) and unadjusted 95% confidence 
intervals. Response speed and accuracy metrics were standardized (z-scored) 
before analysis to allow for comparison among cognitive domains. a, Difference 
in cognition accuracy and speed in-flight relative to pre-flight. b, Difference in 
cognition accuracy and speed post-flight relative to pre-flight. c, Change in 
astronaut ratings of their behavioural state in-flight (blue) and post-flight 
(orange) relative to pre-flight and unadjusted 95% confidence intervals. 
Astronauts reported on their behavioural state using 11-point Likert scales 
using the alertness and mood survey50. For a, b and c, differences between 
mission phases were tested using mixed-effect models contrasting in-flight 
and post-flight relative to pre-flight; P values were corrected for multiple 
comparisons using the false discovery rate method51, and adjusted significant 
associations are denoted as: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ****P < 0.0001. d, Average 
HRV, a measure of parasympathetic regulation of cardiac function, across 1 h 
measurement periods (n = 127). HRV estimates were derived from heart period 
data collected via the Apple Watch using the s.d. of RR intervals. Significant 
changes in HRV (F = 5.64, P = 0.0046) and heart rate (F = 37.10, P < 0.0001) were 
observed in the Inspiration4 crew across mission phases. e, One-minute 
averages of spacecraft CO2 levels. NASA’s current 1 h standard restricts CO2 
levels to less than 3 mmHg. f, Relationship between 1 h average CO2 levels in  
the spacecraft and HRV for each astronaut in-flight (n = 44). AM, abstract 
matching; BART, balloon analogue risk test; DSST, digit–symbol substitution 
task; ERT, emotion recognition test; F2B, fractal 2-back; LOT, line orientation 
test; MP, motor praxis task; MRT, matrix reasoning test; PVT, psychomotor 
vigilance test; VOLT, visual object learning test.

Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024  |  1161
lower cognitive efficiency (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Note 3). These 
cognitive deficits were partially driven by one astronaut (C002), who 
exhibited a substantial performance deficit early in-flight (Extended 
Data Fig. 9). Except for the digit–symbol substitution task, cognitive 
performance post-flight did not differ from performance pre-flight 
(Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 6).
Astronauts also completed an alertness and mood survey (AMS) 
before performing each Cognition battery. Nightly sleep duration of 
6.7 ± 0.7 h in-flight was reported, which is modestly longer than previ-
ous studies35,36. Astronauts reported a moderate level of stress and high 
workload, similar to astronauts completing 6-month ISS missions36, 
but reported no other alertness or mood symptoms (Extended Data 
Fig. 10). In-flight mood and alertness did not differ from pre-flight, 
but astronauts reported being significantly happier and less bored 
post-flight (Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 7). Although astronaut 
reports of adverse behavioural states were overall similar across mis-
sion phases, there was substantial variability both within and between 
astronauts in their behavioural responses to spaceflight (Extended Data 
Fig. 10). Furthermore, one astronaut (C003) exhibited a considerable 
increase in physical exhaustion upon return to Earth; overall, these 
behavioural responses to short-duration spaceflight are consistent 
with a previous report of astronauts in long-duration (6-month mis-
sions) spaceflight36.
Discussion
To understand the effects of short-duration spaceflight on the human 
body for the all-civilian spaceflight crew, this study performed a suite 
of experiments and collected a wide range of biospecimens before, 
during and after a 3-day orbital mission. This multidimensional battery 
included blood, stool, urine, biopsy and saliva samples, ultrasound 
measurements of the eye, jugular vein and bladder, cognitive and 
sensorimotor tests, surveys and physiological data collected with an 
Apple smartwatch. These data showed some of the same signatures 
of long-duration spaceflight, such as inflammatory response, DNA 
damage response gene expression (and proteins), telomere elonga-
tion and immune signalling changes (Figs. 1 and  2), and demonstrated 
that such phenotypes can also be observed in the earliest phases of 
spaceflight and across a shorter mission time frame. Moreover, this 
mission also enabled new biomedical metrics for spaceflight, such as 
RNA methylation, single-nucleus chromatin, single-cell expression 
metrics and spatial transcriptomics. Overall, this work demonstrated 
that a diverse civilian crew can conduct scientific experiments, process 
samples and significantly contribute to spaceflight research with mini-
mal risk. Although two astronauts presented with SMS, most metrics 
(for example, IJV size, heart rate, complete blood count metrics, gene 
expression and cytokines) were either stable or quickly reverted to 
pre-flight levels (baseline) after landing on Earth.
The development of diagnostic, point-of-care devices that can 
detect and quantify multiple biomarkers is critical to monitor astro-
nauts’ healthcare for future spaceflight missions and to help guide 
medical interventions. This mission showed that a VFI can be used 
to detect antigens and, more generally, protein markers37–39. Due to 
flight certification constraints required for all technologies used in 
spaceflight, the desiccant usually placed in the packaging kit to avoid 
high humidity exposure during long-term storage had to be removed, 
and has been identified as the main cause for the alteration of the assay 
efficiency in-flight. For future missions, reagent and system stability 
studies will have to determine optimal storage conditions without 
the use of hygroscopic compounds. Despite this obstacle, the 0g-VFI 
demonstrated its robustness of operation in space, and the simplicity 
of its user interface allowed for its use by untrained non-scientists, 
supporting the feasibility of such point-of-care diagnostic systems 
for several applications on additional specimen types, including for 
deep-space missions.
The Inspiration4 ultrasound imaging experiment pursued three 
research objectives, which were to examine (1) urinary bladder func-
tion in microgravity, (2) IJV flow with and without intervention by 
inspiratory resistance and (3) microgravity-associated changes in ocu-
lar morphology. The choice of targets was motivated by high-priority 
concerns and risks reported over the years of ISS missions. For exam-
ple, flow anomalies in the IJV (for example, severe stasis, flow rever-
sal) frequently develop in ISS crew members in the later stages of 
long-duration spaceflight20–22; however, such alterations in cardiovas-
cular function have been less studied in the earlier days of spaceflight 
when precursors to cardiovascular risks may begin to emerge23. In the 
Inspiration4 mission, IJV flow anomalies were not observed in any of the 
four astronauts, suggesting that flow anomalies develop later in-flight. 
The lack of IJV flow anomalies also diverge from Earth-based simula-
tions of microgravity (head-down tilt), which demonstrate IJV and 
other vascular alterations after five days of exposure23. If corroborated 
by future studies in short-duration spaceflight, this finding may further 
our understanding of the mechanisms and progression pattern of 
flow degradation in the left IJV during sustained microgravity. Inspira-
tory resistance reduced right IJV CSA by an average of 36% pre-flight 
(supine) and 29% in-flight but did not reach statistical significance in 
this small cohort of astronauts. This trend suggests facilitated IJV drain-
age due to resistance breathing, and the experiment demonstrated 
a simplified in-flight screening method, with resistance breathing as 
an option to correct anomalous IJV flow. Overall, these findings bode 
well for the cardiovascular safety profile of short-duration missions, 
although future studies that address other anatomical targets are 
needed, as the effects of spaceflight are not uniform throughout the 
cardiovascular system23,24. A better understanding of the cardiovas-
cular risks could alleviate some of the spaceflight health concerns 
for private citizens with diverse health backgrounds and medical 
histories, although notably, no health issues were observed in the 
Inspiration4 crew.
The Inspiration4 mission undertook ultrasound imaging-based 
human research in full crew autonomy, with minimal pre-flight 
familiarization and reliance on experiment-specific just-in-time 
(JIT) instruction. Probing the potential limitations of miniaturized 
ultrasound technology combined with the rapid deployment and 
complete crew autonomy was an inseparable part of the experiment. 
This autonomy is in stark contrast to the ISS experience, where all 
imaging sessions are conducted with a traditional device and in 
real-time interaction with experts in the mission control centre. The 
anatomical and technical quality of the images, expressed as overall 
success scores, appeared inversely related to the complexity of the 
autonomous procedures. Bladder imaging (the simplest procedure) 
and IJV imaging (intermediate difficulty and complexity) each had 
similar scores, well above the usability threshold. Conversely, the 
ocular imaging procedure (most intricate), which required precise 
gaze control and accurate probe manipulation by real-time visual 
feedback, did not produce image sets of sufficient quality to derive the 
intended measures, such as globe axial length or optic nerve sheath 
diameter. In this study, all but the most intricate procedures could 
be successfully performed by minimally trained users with the aid of 
appropriate JIT materials. Based on these findings, as well as those 
acquired during similar applications on the ISS, ocular imaging with 
JIT instruction in future missions should involve a dedicated ultra-
sound operator; however, other exams can be reliably performed 
in self-scanning, autonomous mode, which represents a significant 
medical and research capability in situations with degraded communi-
cations (for example, high latency, loss of communication). Payloads 
consisting of a miniaturized imaging system with an intuitive interface 
can enable future experiments featuring short lead and training times, 
rapid deployment, flexible schedules and data collection autonomy, 
which will enable scientific research opportunities even on the most 
constrained of spaceflight missions.

1162  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024
Article
Studying ocular misalignment and otolith symmetry in short- 
duration spaceflight is not without caveats. First, the Inspiration4 
results (Fig. 4) are based on comparing pre-flight and post-flight tests 
and relating that comparison to in-flight SMS. The ultimate goal is to 
use pre-flight tests alone to predict in-flight susceptibility, which is 
planned for future flights. The incidence of SMS was 50% in the Inspi-
ration4 mission, which is consistent with the reported incidence in 
short-duration spaceflight29. Second, there is no relation between 
motion sickness susceptibility in parabolic flight and susceptibility 
in orbital flight, yet early work on torsional alignment was performed 
in parabolic flight to predict susceptibility in orbital flight40. Third, our 
results with VAN are promising for SMS prediction, while results with 
TAN are not (of note, the original work41 relating SMS to ocular skew 
was done with torsion). Finally, SMS has multiple contributing factors 
and multiple manifestations that vary between individuals, and thus it 
may be unrealistic to think that a single measure will continue to have 
high predictive power in a larger population.
Consistent with studies of astronauts and cosmonauts completing 
both short- and long-duration spaceflight missions34–36, collecting 
objective measures of astronaut cardiovascular functions and neu-
rocognitive functioning, as well as subjective measures of sleep and 
astronaut behavioural states, is feasible in commercial astronaut crews 
throughout short-duration orbital missions. The Inspiration4 crew 
provided valid and usable data on cardiovascular physiology, cogni-
tive performance and behavioural states across mission phases that 
can translate to the general public3,42, which is important as trained 
astronauts from international space agencies are not necessarily rep-
resentative of the average individual. The effects of short-duration 
spaceflight on Inspiration4 crew cardiovascular physiology and cogni-
tive performance were modest, although there was substantial inter-
individual variability in the response to spaceflight, as previously 
observed34,43,44.
Studies of cognitive performance have generally found that astro-
nauts maintain relatively high levels of performance in spaceflight, 
although this may be a function of the duration of spaceflight missions, 
where performance decrements manifest with longer mission dura-
tions1,34. In this study, accuracy on eight of the ten (80%) cognition tests 
was unaffected by short-duration spaceflight (Fig. 5). There was, how-
ever, more variability in astronaut response speed on neurocognitive 
tasks, where slower response speeds were observed on four cognition 
tests, a finding consistent with earlier reports of astronaut response 
slowing during short-duration spaceflight (that is, less than or equal 
to 10 days in spaceflight shuttle missions)45,46.
Although previous studies have not found large cognitive perfor-
mance deficits in spaceflight, this may be due to the timing of neuro-
cognitive testing, which often does not occur on the first day in-flight, 
but up to four days in-flight, at which point cognitive deficits may have 
dissipated. Furthermore, the observed changes in response speed may, 
to some extent, be associated with neurovestibular and sensorimotor 
alterations induced by spaceflight26,47. While astronaut sleep dura-
tions less than 6 h on the ISS have been associated with psychomo-
tor slowing, Inspiration4 astronauts averaged 6.7 h of sleep per night 
in-flight and thus the contribution of sleep loss to slower response 
speeds would be modest if present36. Astronauts did not report overtly 
negative behavioural states in-flight (for example, depression, stress), 
but they reported more happiness and less boredom post-flight rela-
tive to pre-flight (Fig. 5).
Significantly, all data from this study are stored in multiple controlled- 
access repositories for easy access, including TrialX, NASA’s Open 
Science Data Repository and GeneLab, the SOMA data portal and the 
Commercial Spaceflight Data Repository, which facilitates the col-
lection of mission-specific research, medical data and biospecimens 
to be stored in a permanent electronic data and tissue repository for 
future scientific research. These data also include qualitative survey 
data received via mobile apps, DICOM-standard images from portable 
ultrasound devices, data from wearables (for example, heart rate, elec-
trocardiogram), biospecimen information, cell processing details48 
and the environmental/mission data from the Crew Dragon capsule 
(for example, cabin pressure, temperature and humidity, spacecraft 
telemetry), which can help guide exploration-class future missions49. 
Finally, the repository contains a visualization dashboard for research-
ers to view summary analytics and access individual observations and 
data files, which has been added to TRISH’s enhancing exploration 
platforms and analogue definition programme.
Although the Inspiration4 mission was the first all-civilian crew to 
complete a short-duration, orbital spaceflight mission while collecting 
repeated multidimensional measurements of biological and behav-
ioural function relevant to the challenges of spaceflight, the study is 
not without limitations. Although the total sample of n = 4 astronauts 
is small, it is not inconsistent with previous studies of astronaut cog-
nitive performance in spaceflight. While data collection spaceflight 
is challenging and limited by numerous factors (for example, cost, 
limited time and access to astronauts), longitudinal sampling of meas-
ures within and across mission phases can promote statistical power 
(Supplementary Note 1). This study did not have age- and sex-matched 
controls on Earth; however, repeated measures within the Inspira-
tion4 crew across mission phases allow for astronauts to serve as their 
own controls (within-subjects design) by using their pre-flight (that is, 
baseline) levels as a reference. Future studies, or additional studies with 
equivalent design, of civilian astronauts in short-duration spaceflight 
with larger sample sizes are needed to confirm the findings or to assign 
any possible causal links.
Finally, it is worth noting that the Inspiration4 mission was not 
designed to address how the biological and behavioural responses 
of the Inspiration4 crew relate to those of professional astronauts or 
cosmonauts, or those with career-long exposure to spaceflight. Fur-
thermore, the research on the Inspiration4 mission was not designed 
to determine the safety of spaceflight for all civilians, or to recommend 
spaceflight for future civilian passengers; the Inspiration4 research 
projects were also not tasked with making judgements for future crew 
selection or fitness for spaceflight. The selection of astronauts for 
spaceflight is exclusive to international space agencies (governmen-
tal or commercial). Nonetheless, the Inspiration4 data, along with 
data from other civilian spaceflight missions, may contribute to the 
development of reference ranges and pre-flight preparatory tasks (for 
example, behavioural testing in confined environments) that can help 
guide future crew selection and mission planning.
Conclusions
While broad in its research scope, this study represents only the begin-
ning. Anatomical and physiological variability, small sample size, the 
operational complexities of a highly constrained mission and lim-
ited skill management capabilities combined to preclude confident 
conclusions on many physiological variables. However, as intended 
by the TRISH, enhancing exploration platforms and analog defini-
tion, and SOMA programmes, these Inspiration4 data will serve as 
a rich foundation for scaling and enhancing the knowledge base on 
early phases of space physiology, and expanding our understanding 
of spaceflight-associated effects on human health. Future missions 
can also include telemedicine, more autonomous data collection, 
next-generation sequencing-based in-flight omics assays and related 
diagnostics tools. Excitingly, some of these same astronauts will be 
present on future missions and/or contribute to long-term studies of 
astronaut health, which will help delineate the short- and long-term 
impacts of spaceflight and continue to prepare future astronauts for 
their missions.
Finally, it is worth noting that collaboration with government, aca-
demia and the private sector at the same time led to lessons learned 
that should be useful to investigators embarking on similar endeavours 

Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024  |  1163
in future civilian spaceflight missions. Specifically, co-ordination 
among diverse research teams can be enabled by agile funding entities 
(for example, TRISH, SpaceX, philanthropy) and a dedicated project 
manager. Also, a single institutional review board (IRB) protocol, 
such as that put in place by TRISH, can simplify subject consenting, 
while a standardized database provider (TrialX, funded by TRISH) was 
critical for data ingestion, cross-institute sharing and standardization 
for future cross-mission analyses and use of artificial intelligence 
and machine learning approaches. Finally, the consent and release 
forms of study participants were envisioned for long-term use, with 
datasets managed under the oversight of a data release board, and 
for these precious samples to be utilized and characterized for many 
years to come.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summa-
ries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowl-
edgements, peer review information, details of author contributions 
and competing interests, and statements of data and code availability 
are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07648-x.
1.	
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis of a 
year-long human spaceflight. Science 364, eaau8650 (2019).
2.	
Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental biological features of spaceflight: advancing the field 
to enable deep-space exploration. Cell 183, 1162–1184 (2020).
3.	
Urquieta, E., Wu, J., Hury, J. & Donoviel, D. Establishment of an open biomedical database 
for commercial spaceflight. Nat. Med. 28, 611–612 (2022).
4.	
Kim, J. et al. Single-cell multi-ome and immune profiles of the Inspiration4 crew reveal 
cell-type, sex, and microbiome-specific responses and recovery. Nat. Commun. 15, 4954 
(2024).
5.	
Overbey, E. G. et al. The Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA): a comprehensive  
data resource and international biobank for astronauts. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-024-07639-y (2024).
6.	
Garcia-Medina, J. S. et al. Genome and clonal hematopoiesis stability contrasts with 
immune, cfDNA, mitochondrial, and telomere length changes during short duration 
spaceflight. Precis. Clin. Med. 7, pbae007 (2024).
7.	
Houerbi, N. et al. Secretome profiling captures acute changes in oxidative stress, brain 
homeostasis and coagulation from spaceflight. Nat. Commun. 15, 4862 (2024).
8.	
Grigorev, K. et al. Direct RNA sequencing of astronauts reveals spaceflight-associated 
epitranscriptome changes and stress-related transcriptional responses. Nat. Commun. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48929-3 (2024).
9.	
Park, J. et al. Spatial multi-omics of human skin reveals KRAS and inflammatory responses 
to spaceflight. Nat. Commun. 15, 4773 (2024).
10.	
Tierney, B. et al. Longitudinal multi-omics analysis of host microbiome architecture and 
immune responses during short-term spaceflight. Nat. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41564-024-01635-8 (2024).
11.	
Crucian, B. et al. Immune system dysregulation occurs during short duration spaceflight 
on board the space shuttle. J. Clin. Immunol. 33, 456–465 (2013).
12.	
Crucian, B. et al. Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration spaceflight. 
NPJ Microgravity 1, 15013 (2015).
13.	
Mehta, S. K. et al. Multiple latent viruses reactivate in astronauts during Space Shuttle 
missions. Brain Behav. Immun. 41, 210–217 (2014).
14.	
Mehta, S. K. et al. Latent virus reactivation in astronauts on the international space station. 
NPJ Microgravity 3, 11 (2017).
15.	
Elko, E. A. et al. COVID-19 vaccination elicits an evolving, cross-reactive antibody 
response to epitopes conserved with endemic coronavirus spike proteins. Cell Rep. 40, 
111022 (2022).
16.	
Henson, S. N. et al. PepSeq: a fully in vitro platform for highly multiplexed serology  
using customizable DNA-barcoded peptide libraries. Nat. Protoc. 18, 396–423  
(2022).
17.	
Ladner, J. T. et al. Epitope-resolved profiling of the SARS-CoV-2 antibody response 
identifies cross-reactivity with endemic human coronaviruses. Cell Rep. Med. 2, 100189 
(2021).
18.	
Pierson, D. L., Stowe, R. P., Phillips, T. M., Lugg, D. J. & Mehta, S. K. Epstein–Barr  
virus shedding by astronauts during space flight. Brain Behav. Immun. 19, 235–242 
(2005).
19.	
Kelley, E. J. et al. Virome-wide detection of natural infection events and the associated 
antibody dynamics using longitudinal highly-multiplexed serology. Nat. Commun. 14, 
1783 (2023).
20.	 Pavela, J. et al. Surveillance for jugular venous thrombosis in astronauts. Vasc. Med. 27, 
365–372 (2022).
21.	
Auñón-Chancellor, S. M., Pattarini, J. M., Moll, S. & Sargsyan, A. Venous thrombosis during 
spaceflight. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 89–90 (2020).
22.	 Marshall-Goebel, K. et al. Assessment of jugular venous blood flow stasis and thrombosis 
during spaceflight. JAMA Netw. Open 2, e1915011 (2019).
23.	 Arbeille, P. et al. Adaptation of the left heart, cerebral and femoral arteries, and jugular 
and femoral veins during short- and long-term head-down tilt and spaceflights. Eur. J. 
Appl. Physiol. 86, 157–168 (2001).
24.	 Arbeille, P., Provost, R., Zuj, K. & Vincent, N. Measurements of jugular, portal, femoral, and 
calf vein cross-sectional area for the assessment of venous blood redistribution with long 
duration spaceflight (Vessel Imaging Experiment). Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 2099–2106 
(2015).
25.	 Clément, G. R. et al. Challenges to the central nervous system during human spaceflight 
missions to Mars. J. Neurophysiol. 123, 2037–2063 (2020).
26.	 Roy-O’Reilly, M., Mulavara, A. & Williams, T. A review of alterations to the brain during 
spaceflight and the potential relevance to crew in long-duration space exploration. NPJ 
Microgravity 7, 5 (2021).
27.	
von Baumgarten, R. J. & Thumler, R. in Life Sciences and Space Research Vol. 17  
(ed. Holmquist, R.) 161–170 (Pergamon, 1979).
28.	 Davis, J. R., Vanderploeg, J. M., Santy, P. A., Jennings, R. T. & Stewart, D. F. Space motion 
sickness during 24 flights of the space shuttle. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 59, 1185–1189 
(1988).
29.	 Thornton, W. E. & Bonato, F. Space motion sickness and motion sickness: symptoms and 
etiology. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 84, 716–721 (2013).
30.	 Shen, M. & Frishman, W. H. Effects of spaceflight on cardiovascular physiology and 
health. Cardiol. Rev. 27, 122–126 (2019).
31.	
Arzeno, N. M., Stenger, M. B., Bloomberg, J. J. & Platts, S. H. Spaceflight-induced 
cardiovascular changes and recovery during NASA’s Functional Task Test. Acta Astronaut. 
92, 10–14 (2013).
32.	 Tu, D. et al. Dynamic ensemble prediction of cognitive performance in spaceflight. Sci. Rep. 
12, 11032 (2022).
33.	 Basner, M. et al. Development and validation of the cognition test battery for spaceflight. 
Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 86, 942–952 (2015).
34.	 Strangman, G. E., Sipes, W. & Beven, G. Human cognitive performance in spaceflight and 
analogue environments. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 85, 1033–1048 (2014).
35.	 Barger, L. K. et al. Prevalence of sleep deficiency and use of hypnotic drugs in astronauts 
before, during, and after spaceflight: an observational study. Lancet Neurol. 13, 904–912 
(2014).
36.	 Jones, C. W., Basner, M., Mollicone, D. J., Mott, C. M. & Dinges, D. F. Sleep deficiency in 
spaceflight is associated with degraded neurobehavioral functions and elevated stress in 
astronauts on six-month missions aboard the International Space Station. Sleep 45, 
zsac006 (2022).
37.	
Chen, P. et al. Paper-based Vertical Flow Immunoassay (VFI) for detection of bio-threat 
pathogens. Talanta 191, 81–88 (2019).
38.	 Devadhasan, J. P. et al. Point-of-care vertical flow immunoassay system for ultra-sensitive 
multiplex biothreat-agent detection in biological fluids. Biosens. Bioelectron. 219, 114796 
(2023).
39.	 Summers, A. J. et al. Optimization of an antibody microarray printing process using a 
designed experiment. ACS Omega 7, 32262–32271 (2022).
40.	 Diamond, S. G. & Markham, C. H. Prediction of space motion sickness susceptibility by 
disconjugate eye torsion in parabolic flight. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 62, 201–205 
(1991).
41.	
Markham, C. H. & Diamond, S. G. A predictive test for space motion sickness. J. Vestib. 
Res. 3, 289–295 (1993).
42.	 Open science in space. Nat. Med. 27, 1485–1485 (2021).
43.	 Lee, S. M. C., Feiveson, A. H., Stein, S., Stenger, M. B. & Platts, S. H. Orthostatic  
intolerance after ISS and space shuttle missions. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 86,  
A54–A67 (2015).
44.	 Meck, J. V., Reyes, C. J., Perez, S. A., Goldberger, A. L. & Ziegler, M. G. Marked exacerbation 
of orthostatic intolerance after long- vs. short-duration spaceflight in veteran astronauts. 
Psychosom. Med. 63, 865–873 (2001).
45.	 Kelly, T. H., Hienz, R. D., Zarcone, T. J., Wurster, R. M. & Brady, J. V. Crewmember 
performance before, during, and after spaceflight. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 84, 227–241 
(2005).
46.	 Newman, D. J. & Lathan, C. E. Memory processes and motor control in extreme 
environments. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. C. Appl. Rev. 29, 387–394 (1999).
47.	
Bloomberg, J. J., Reschke, M. F., Clément, G. R., Mulavara, A. P. & Taylor, L. C. Evidence 
Report: Risk of Impaired Control of Spacecraft/Associated Systems and Decreased 
Mobility due to Vestibular/Sensorimotor Alterations Associated with Space Flight (NASA, 
2016).
48.	 Barisic, D. et al. ARID1A orchestrates SWI/SNF-mediated sequential binding of transcription 
factors with ARID1A loss driving pre-memory B cell fate and lymphomagenesis. Cancer 
Cell 42, 583–604.e11 (2024).
49.	 Nangle, S. N. et al. The case for biotech on Mars. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 401–407 (2020).
50.	 Pundyavana, A., Gilad, Y., Stahn, A. C. & Basner, M. Cognition test battery survey: 
development of a single alertness and mood score for short- and long-duration 
spaceflight. Appl. Sci. 13, 2364 (2023).
51.	
Curran-Everett, D. Multiple comparisons: philosophies and illustrations. Am. J. Physio. 
Regul. Integr. Comp. Physio. 279, R1–R8 (2000).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution 
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate 
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, 
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your 
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, 
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024

1164  |  Nature  |  Vol 632  |  29 August 2024
Article
1Unit for Experimental Psychiatry, Division of Sleep and Chronobiology, Department of 
Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
2Department of Physiology, Biophysics and Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA. 3The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational 
Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 4The WorldQuant Initiative for 
Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 5Center for STEM, 
University of Austin, Austin, TX, USA. 6Center for Applied Nanobioscience and Medicine, 
College of Medicine-Phoenix, University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, USA. 7Department of Basic 
Medical Sciences, College of Medicine Phoenix, University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, USA. 
8Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons, 
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 9TrialX Inc., New York, NY, 
USA. 10KBR, Science & Space, Houston, TX, USA. 11Department of Otolaryngology - Head & 
Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.  
12The Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen), Phoenix, AZ, USA. 13Departments of 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 14Center for 
Space Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 15The Translational 
Research Institute for Space Health (TRISH), Houston, TX, USA. 16Stanley Center  
for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.  
17Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research 
Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 18Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative 
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA. 19Children’s Cancer and Blood Foundation Laboratories, Departments of Pediatrics and 
Cell and Developmental Biology, Drukier Institute for Children’s Health, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 20Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, 
Center of Systems Biology, Biodiversity and Bioresources, Faculty of Biology and Geology, 
Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. 21Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 22SpaceX, Hawthorne, CA, USA. 23University of Texas, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. 24Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. 25These authors contributed equally: 
Christopher W. Jones, Eliah G. Overbey, Jerome Lacombe. 26These authors jointly 
supervised this work: M. Basner, C. E. Mason. ✉e-mail: basner@pennmedicine.upenn.edu; 
chm2042@med.cornell.edu

Methods
Subjects and consent
Four adult non-professional astronauts were selected to participate 
in the Inspiration4 mission. All subjects provided written informed 
consent to participate in the study, which included the collection and 
use of their samples and data in research protocols at Weill Cornell 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine/TRISH and collaborating insti-
tutions; the study was approved by multiple IRBs and included the 
following IRB protocols: Weill Cornell Medicine IRB no. 21-05023569, 
WCG-IRB 1309934, Multimodal Evaluation of Spaceflight Participants 
Health – SpaceX Inspiration-4 Mission; Baylor College of Medicine/
Translational Research Institute for Space Health IRB no. 1316696, 
WCG-IRB 20214456, Commercial Spaceflight Data Repository. Sub-
jects consented to the storage of their de-identified, coded research 
data in a secure, password-protected database at SpaceX, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine/TRISH, and the institutions of 
study co-investigators. Subjects also consented to the publication of 
the results of this research while maintaining their confidentiality.
Multi-omics methods
Datasets generated for multi-omics profiling span nine different bio-
specimen sample types: whole blood, serum, plasma, peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs), extracellular vesicles and particles, dried 
blood spots, skin biopsies, skin swabs and capsule swabs. These sam-
ples were subject to a spectrum of multi-omic assays, including WGS, 
clonal haematopoiesis, direct RNA sequencing, single-nuclei RNA 
sequencing, single-nuclei ATAC-seq, single-cell B cell repertoire and 
T cell repertoire V(D)J sequencing, proteomics, metabolomics, cell-free 
DNA sequencing, metagenomics and metatranscriptomics. Additional 
biomarkers were quantified using a CLIA lab for complete blood count, 
comprehensive metabolic panel and cytokine panel. These data types 
were generated across ten time points in total: three pre-flight (L − 92, 
L − 44, L − 3), three in-flight (FD1, FD2, FD3), one post-flight (R + 1) and 
three recovery (R + 45, R + 82, R + 194).
Multi-omic feature counts describe the datasets published in refs. 4,5. 
Transcripts detected in whole blood RNA sequencing were assembled 
using StringTie52. m6A modifications were quantified using m6Anet53 
with a probability threshold of 0.9. Genes detected from skin biopsy 
had a count of at least five from the normalized count matrix from 
the NanoString GeoMx NGS DnD Pipeline. The number of ATAC-seq 
peaks and genes detected from the single-nuclei data was quantified 
using the cellranger-arc (v2.0.0) count algorithm from 10x Genomics. 
We followed the 10x single-cell multi-ome analysis pipeline as previ-
ously reported48 and adapted for this data as described here. Shotgun 
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing reads were dedu-
plicated, filtered for human sequences via alignment to the human 
reference genome (Hg38) and trimmed for adaptor contamination. 
Fungal, viral and bacterial taxonomic composition was computed via 
masked read alignment to a database containing all complete genomes 
in RefSeq using kraken2 (confidence = 0.2)54. For assembly-based 
approaches, quality-controlled (unmasked) reads were assembled 
with MetaSPAdes55. Bins were generated with MetaBAT2 (ref. 56), and 
Open-Reading-Frames were identified with bakta57 and clustered into 
a non-redundant gene catalogue with mmseqs2 (ref. 58). Assembled 
viral genomes were identified among contigs with CheckV59. Additional 
details can be found in ref. 10.
Virome methods
Highly multiplexed, epitope-resolved IgG reactivity analysis across the 
human virome was performed on reconstituted dried blood samples 
using DNA-barcoded peptide (PepSeq) assays. The HV2 library has been 
previously described15 and consists of 15,000 30mer peptides covering 
80 viral species and selected based on earlier evidence of reactivity in 
other cohorts. PepSeq libraries were synthesized and used to profile 
IgG binding, as previously described16,17. Briefly, DNA-barcoded peptide 
libraries were generated using bulk in vitro enzymatic reactions, start-
ing with the PCR amplification of oligonucleotide templates and their 
transcription to generate mRNA. The product was ligated to a hairpin 
oligonucleotide adaptor bearing a puromycin molecule tethered by a 
polyethylene glycol spacer and used as a template in an in vitro transla-
tion reaction. Finally, a reverse transcription reaction, primed by the 
adaptor hairpin, was used to generate cDNA, and the original mRNA 
was removed using RNAse. To perform serological assays, 0.1 pmol of 
the resulting DNA-barcoded peptide library (5 μl) was added to 5 μl of 
neat, reconstituted blood spot solution and incubated overnight. The 
binding reaction was applied to prewashed protein G-bearing beads, 
washed, eluted and indexed using barcoded DNA oligos. Following PCR 
cleanup, products were pooled, quantified and sequenced using an 
Illumina NextSeq instrument yielding a depth of more than 900,000 
reads per sample.
Z-score enrichment values for each peptide in each sample were 
generated from raw sequence reads in a two-step process using PepSIRF 
v.1.4.0, an open-source software package for the analysis of highly mul-
tiplexed serology60 data. First, reads were demultiplexed and mapped to 
members of the HV2 library using the demux module to generate inte-
ger count values for each sample peptide. Next, peptides with similar 
abundances in the buffer-only negative control samples were grouped 
into bins and used to generate z-scores for each data point, representing 
the distance (in standard deviations) of each data point from its unen-
riched distribution mean. log2-transformed offset-adjusted z-scores 
(log2(z + 8) − 3) were used for downstream analyses. At an adjusted 
z-score threshold of 0.75, we detected 45 virus species (Supplementary 
Table 3) for which at least 1 peptide was reactive in at least 1 sample. 
To identify viral events, we applied peptide set enrichment analysis to 
all pairs of consecutive samples as previously described19, and used a 
P value threshold of 1 × 10−5.
Membrane printing
0g-VFI membranes were fabricated using nitrocellulose membrane 
sheets (9 × 8 cm), which were prepared into target membranes on a 
bench-top CO2 laser cutter at 1% power, 100% speed and 3 mm depth. 
These target membranes have circular discs (6 mm diameter) cut into 
them in a 6 × 5 design with fiducial markers for targeting the dispens-
ing locations during microarray printing. Control antibody reagent 
(mouse IgG), rabbit anti-human CRP (11250-R106, SinoBiological) and 
goat anti-human IgM (109-005-129, Jackson ImmunoResearch) capture 
antibodies were diluted to working concentrations (0.5 mg ml−1) using 
filtered 1× PBS. In a clean-room environment, a Nano-Plotter NP2.1 was 
used for non-contact piezoelectric microarray dispensing of capture 
antibodies onto the circular discs of a target nitrocellulose membrane 
(0.2 µm pore size). To prevent evaporation of reagents during printing, 
an ambient humidity of 55% was maintained using a humidifier. The 
nozzle hydrostatic pressure was set with the water level of the pressure 
compensation vessel at the pipette tip height. Spot-front-end software 
was utilized to co-ordinate a spotting plan for use in the Nano-Plotter 
Controller software (NPC16) to dispense a nine-spot pattern (350 µm 
period) of the antibody microarray onto the centre of each circular 
disc. A 384-well microplate was used to aspirate the antibodies during 
dispensing. The test reagents were dispensed in 20 droplets per spot 
at their respective working concentrations at the top two rows (three 
spots per row for each reagent) of the nine-spot pattern. Ten droplets 
of the control reagent were dispensed at the bottom three spots of the 
nine-spot pattern. The immunoassay membranes were then stored in 
aluminium pouches with silica bead desiccant for later use.
Preparation of conjugation pad
Conjugate pads were fabricated using polyester fibre with binder 
(Grade 6614, Ahlstrom Munksjo), which were cut into circular discs 
(10.5 mm) on a bench-top CO2 laser cutter. Gold nanoparticles 

Article
conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (kindly provided by Dr AuCoin at the Uni-
versity of Nevada-Reno) were incubated with mouse anti-human CRP 
(11250-R106, SinoBiological) and IgM (MA5-14729, ThermoFisher) for 
10 min. The conjugate mix was then dispensed and dried on the con-
jugate pads at 25 °C for 2 h.
Assembly of vertical flow apparatus
The 0g-VFI consists of a stacked multilayer of pads and membranes 
assembled in 3D-printed plastic caps and capsules (Extended Data 
Fig. 3a). The sandwich immunoassay on the 0g-VFI is performed at the 
multiplexed sensing nitrocellulose membrane, which contains the nine 
immunoreaction spots. Above the 0g-VFI membrane are functional 
paper layers, which decrease flow surface area to achieve uniform verti-
cal flow (flow-directing pad), decrease flow rate to increase intensity 
(retarding pad), generate the assay colour (conjugation pad) and col-
lect plasma samples (sample pad). These layers are all contained in 
a 3D-printed pad holder, placed in a membrane housing that allows 
contact between the 0g-VFI membrane and cotton absorbing pads. The 
user-friendly device also contains capsules within which are wet pads 
(assay or washing buffer) that trigger fluid transfer once screwed to the 
membrane housing and placed in contact with the absorbing pads. In 
total, the 0g-VFI contains four modules consisting of the membrane 
housing protected with a cap, assay buffer capsule, washing buffer 
capsule and magnifier cap, all of which fit in small zip bags (Extended 
Data Fig. 3b). Overall, the assay takes up to 20 min due to its simple 
assembly sequence using the screw cap and reservoir design of the 
0g-VFI platform (Extended Data Fig. 3c). A user manual and instruction 
video were made to detail the workflow procedure to SpaceX personnel 
and Inspiration4 crew. The user manual was integrated in the 0g-VFI 
kit and was thus available in-flight. The Inspiration4 crew were trained 
by SpaceX personnel and were instructed to work in pairs for sample 
collection and to self-perform the 0g-VFI procedure.
All plastic components of the 0g-VFI were designed in SolidWorks 
and 3D-printed in house at the Center for Applied NanoBioscience and 
Medicine using a Surgical Guide Resin material from Formlabs. Using 
the Formlabs 3B stereolithography printer, the 0g-VFI was printed and 
then washed for 20 min in 99% isopropyl alcohol to clear loose and 
uncured resin. Curing was then performed under intense ultraviolet 
light at 70 °C for 30 min, followed by trimming of the support scaffolds. 
First, the different pad layers were stacked inside of the pad holder as 
follows (ordered top to bottom): sample pad (made from chopped 
glass with binder (Grade 8950, Ahlstrom Munksjo)), polyethersulfone 
filter, conjugate pad, retarding and flow-directing pads both made 
of thin glass fibres (Grade 8950, Ahlstrom Munksjo). All layers were 
assembled with double-sided, medical-grade pressure-sensitive adhe-
sive (ARcare 90106NB). Second, a 3.5-cm-diameter cotton pad (Grade 
320, Ahlstrom Munksjo) was positioned in the membrane housing 
with a 6-mm-diameter cotton pad (Grade 222, Ahlstrom Munksjo) on 
top, both acting as absorbent pads. The 0g-VFI printed membrane 
was then placed on top of the absorbing pads and 400 µl of blocking 
buffer (10 mM borate buffer (pH 8) with 2.5% Triton X-100, 1% bovine 
serum albumin, 0.2% polyvinylpyrrolidone-40 and 0.1% sucrose filtered 
through a 0.2 µm polyethersulfone filter membrane) was pipetted 
on it and incubated for 30 min. Then, the pad holder was positioned 
inside the housing membrane and the device was tightly closed with 
a lid. Separately, wet pads saturated with a TritonX100 (0.1%), albu-
min (0.5%), PBS (0.1 M) solution and a 50 mM carbonate/bicarbonate 
buffer (washing buffer) were placed in the assay buffer pad capsule 
and the washing buffer pad capsule, respectively. Plasma was sepa-
rated from fingerstick-collected whole blood using a modified A-PON 
plasma separator cartridge (GattaCo). As drawing blood using con-
ventional methods is difficult in spaceflight for novice astronauts, 
whole blood was collected via fingerstick using a Food and Drug 
Administration-approved lancet to promote successful sample col-
lection by the Inspiration4 crew.
Ultrasound methods
All imaging was performed with a Butterfly iQ+ handheld ultrasound 
system (Butterfly Network) with the Butterfly mobile app running on 
iPhone12 (Apple, Inc.). The device was used in approved preset modes 
for each procedure (ophthalmic, vascular and bladder). Eighty-nine 
imaging instances (multiframe cine of varied length) were collected 
pre-flight and 108 (7.68 GB) images were collected in-flight. All in-flight 
data (27 instances per astronaut on average; range = 18–32) were stored 
on the local device (iPhone 12) until secure transfer to a DICOM (Digital 
Imaging and Communications in Medicine) server upon return to Earth. 
Image analysis was performed in Osirix MD DICOM software (Pixmeo). 
Of the n = 106 in-flight imaging instances analysed, n = 73 were related 
to IJV, n = 14 to urinary bladder and n = 19 were ophthalmic.
All astronauts were self-scanning operators. All pre-flight crew inter-
actions (experiment briefing, familiarization and training, and baseline 
data collection) were conducted by SpaceX personnel using limited 
time allocations. Using a previously untested approach to experiment 
execution, the investigative team relied on experiment-specific JIT 
instructions to communicate both conceptual and procedural infor-
mation to SpaceX personnel (for baseline data collection and famil-
iarization) and to the Inspiration4 crew (for autonomous in-flight data 
collection). In-flight imaging data were obtained via self-scanning and 
used potable water as a coupling medium in lieu of ultrasound gel. 
Bladder scans were collected both pre- and post-void, whenever pos-
sible. IJV scans were performed with and without inspiratory resistance 
generated by an ITD (ResQGARD ITD7, Zoll).
Given the risks to data quality posed by limitations of imaging exper-
tise, and to evaluate the effectiveness of the JIT tools, a formalized data 
quality assessment was conducted in the initial phase of data analysis. 
This included the scoring of each imaging instance for anatomical accu-
racy and technical quality on a scale of 0–3 (0 = no useful information, 
3 = clinical quality). Anatomical accuracy criteria included whether the 
target was clearly and contiguously visible, along with essential ana-
tomical landmarks; technical quality criteria included elements such 
as image clarity, gain, acoustical interference, artefact and shadowing. 
An overall success score was derived as the mean of these two scores, 
with a usability threshold set at 2.0. This quality filter served to reject 
anatomically inaccurate or technically flawed images. To determine 
whether the success of imaging instances varied by anatomical target, 
a one-way ANOVA tested for in-flight differences in imaging success 
scores among anatomical targets (that is, bladder, IJV and eye); post hoc 
pairwise comparisons between anatomical targets were conducted via 
Tukey’s honest significant difference. To evaluate the effect of imped-
ance breathing on IJV CSA, a series of paired, two-tailed Student’s t-tests 
were conducted; differences between normal and impedance breathing 
were evaluated by averaging IJV CSA for each condition within each 
mission phase (that is, pre-flight and in-flight).
Ocular misalignment methods
The otolith organs of the vestibular system transduce linear accelera-
tion and gravity. The sense organs consist of a mass of calcium carbon-
ate crystals (otoconia) that overlie a membrane that is innervated with 
hair cells. Motion of the crystals relative to the hair cells bends the 
hair cells, and this bending modifies their firing rates and so provides 
information on linear acceleration to the central vestibular system. 
While generally symmetric, there is reason to believe that there are 
slight asymmetries between the otolith organs on the two sides of 
the head, in otoconial mass or synaptic sensitivity. This asymmetry 
is compensated by central neural processes27, but this compensa-
tion becomes inappropriate in gravity fields other than 1g, leading to 
changes in vertical and torsional ocular alignment61,62. In particular, 
the magnitude of torsional misalignment in altered g levels has been 
associated with susceptibility to SMS40,41,63. G-dependent changes in 
vertical alignment have also been demonstrated in parabolic flight 

and laboratory studies62,64. Data on SMS in-flight were obtained via 
self-report.
A perceptual-nulling technique was used to measure misalignment 
between the eyes (skew) in both vertical and torsional directions65. For 
these tests, the subject views a red line and a blue line on the touch-
screen of a tablet computer, through colour-matched red and blue 
filters, one over each eye. This provides independent images to each 
eye. Since the test is performed in darkness, there is no visual informa-
tion that is seen by both eyes together, and hence there are no visual 
cues to align the eyes (which would fuse the images on the two retinas). 
One line remains fixed on the screen, while the other line is positioned 
by the subject, either vertically or torsionally. The subject’s goal is to 
adjust one line until it appears to be aligned with the other, stationary, 
line (that is, to null any apparent vertical or rotational offset between 
the lines). The final amount by which the lines are separated from one 
another vertically or rotated relative to one another provides a meas-
ure of vertical or torsional ocular misalignment, respectively, which 
produces measures of VAN and TAN. Astronauts completed VAN and 
TAN measures twice pre-flight and twice post-flight, where each session 
consisted of 11 VAN and 11 TAN trials. There was no in-flight testing.
Statistical testing to evaluate associations of torsional (TAN) and ver-
tical (VAN) ocular misalignment with SMS were carried out via a series 
of two-sample t-tests within each astronaut individually to provide 
information on the following: (1) whether the two pre-flight datasets are 
the same or different from each other, (2) whether the two post-flight 
datasets are the same or different from each other and (3) whether the 
(grouped) pre-flight data are different from the (grouped) post-flight 
data. The t-tests were performed after removing outliers, which were 
defined as values more than three scaled median absolute deviations 
from the median, where median absolute deviation is a measure of the 
deviation of the values from the median (analogous to the standard 
deviation for data from normal distributions) and can be reduced to a 
sequential decision tree for prediction of individual SMS susceptibility 
(Supplementary Note 2). There are several reasons for this individual 
testing as opposed to a pooled analysis across subjects. First, the high 
variability across subjects (typical of many neurovestibular assess-
ments), combined with the small subject pool, makes it unlikely that 
there would be sufficient statistical power in a pooled analysis. Second, 
individual testing permits a stepwise approach in which a series of tests 
can lead to a predictive metric. Finally, SMS is notoriously idiosyncratic, 
and spaceflight measures are subject to many confounds, which sup-
ports a focused longitudinal examination.
Cardiovascular function
The Apple Watch Series 6 was used to objectively measure cardiovascu-
lar function, which was indexed by blood oxygen saturation levels, heart 
rate and HRV, as well as activity and energy consumption. The Apple 
Watch also measured sound pressure levels. The crew donned the Apple 
Watch for selected periods in all three phases of the mission, including 
pre-flight, in-flight and post-flight (Extended Data Fig. 1). The crew 
donned the Apple Watch from L − 22 to L − 20 and had an average wear 
time of 2.7 ± 0.3 (s.d.) days (range = 2.4–3.0 days), in-flight from FD2 
to FD3 with an average wear time of 1.2 ± 0.1 (s.d.) days (range = 1.2–1.4 
days) and post-flight from R + 0 to R + 10 with an average wear time of 
5.8 ± 3.4 (s.d.) days (range = 2.2–9.1 days).
Neurocognitive functioning
Neurocognitive functioning was assessed using NASA’s cognition test 
battery33, which consists of 10 brief cognitive tests that probe a range of 
neurocognitive domains relevant to the challenges of spaceflight and 
includes the psychomotor vigilance test, matrix reasoning test, abstract 
matching, line orientation test, visual object learning test, motor praxis 
task, emotion recognition task, digit–symbol substitution task, fractal 
2-back and balloon analogue risk test. Developed for high-performing 
astronauts, cognition has been deployed in long-duration spaceflight 
studies1, as well as in ground-based studies that simulate aspects of 
spaceflight in analogue environments66–68. Cognition was adminis-
tered with the Joggle Research App (Pulsar Informatics, Inc.) on an 
iPad Mini Series 4 twice pre-flight (L − 47 and L − 22), up to three times 
in-flight and twice post-flight (R + 0 and R + 1). Cognition data were 
corrected for practice and stimulus set effects after applying another 
correction for the fact that tests were performed on an iPad instead of 
a laptop69,70. After these corrections, the expectation is that test results 
do not change with repeated administration.
Alertness and mood survey
Before performing each cognition test battery, astronauts reported 
on their behavioural state using the AMS50 via the Qualtrics applica-
tion on the Apple iPad Mini Series 4. Developed for astronauts, the 
18-item AMS measures behavioural responses to the challenges of 
both long- and short-duration spaceflight. Fourteen of the 18 AMS 
items were surveyed in the Inspiration4 crew to reduce time burden, 
and the four items that were removed had significant overlap with 
other AMS items. Ten AMS items (monotony, boredom, depression, 
stress, physical exhaustion, sickness, unhappiness, sleepiness, work-
load and sleep quality) prompted astronauts to rate each item using 
11-point Likert scales (range = 0–10). The remaining AMS items assessed 
astronaut sleep timing and duration, crew conflict and medication use 
(stimulant/depressant).
Statistical analysis of cognition, AMS and Apple watch data
All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS v.9.4. Before statistical 
analysis of cognitive performance, all cognition data were standard-
ized via z-scoring to facilitate comparisons across the different neu-
rocognitive domains, as well as to allow the effects to be interpreted 
as effect sizes. Mixed-effects models using PROC MIXED with a ran-
dom subject intercept were used to test astronaut behavioural and 
physiological responses to short-duration spaceflight across mission 
phases. Repeated measures were nested within subjects and differences 
between responses during both the in-flight and post-flight periods were 
tested relative to the pre-flight period using change scores generated 
for each astronaut from the average of an outcome for each mission 
phase. Post hoc analyses that tested differences between astronauts 
and mission phases were corrected for multiple comparisons based on 
the false discovery rate method with a significance threshold of P < 0.05 
(refs. 51); both unadjusted and adjusted P values are reported. For crew- 
level differences between mission phases, Type III effects are reported.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Port-
folio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Datasets have been uploaded to four different data repositories: the 
NASA Open Science Data Repositories (osdr.nasa.gov; comprising 
GeneLab71 and the Ames Life Sciences Data Archive (ALSDA)2,72, the 
SOMA Data Portal and the TRISH EXPAND TrialX database).
 
52.	 Pertea, M. et al. StringTie enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from 
RNA-seq reads. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 290–295 (2015).
53.	 Hendra, C. et al. Detection of m6A from direct RNA sequencing using a multiple instance 
learning framework. Nat. Methods 19, 1590–1598 (2022).
54.	 Wood, D. E., Lu, J. & Langmead, B. Improved metagenomic analysis with Kraken 2. 
Genome Biol. 20, 257 (2019).
55.	 Nurk, S., Meleshko, D., Korobeynikov, A. & Pevzner, P. A. metaSPAdes: a new versatile 
metagenomic assembler. Genome Res. 27, 824–834 (2017).
56.	 Kang, D. D. et al. MetaBAT 2: an adaptive binning algorithm for robust and efficient 
genome reconstruction from metagenome assemblies. PeerJ 7, e7359 (2019).
57.	
Schwengers, O. et al. Bakta: rapid and standardized annotation of bacterial genomes via 
alignment-free sequence identification. Microb. Genom. 7, 000685 (2021).
58.	 Steinegger, M. & Söding, J. MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for 
the analysis of massive data sets. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 1026–1028 (2017).

Article
59.	 Nayfach, S. et al. CheckV assesses the quality and completeness of metagenome- 
assembled viral genomes. Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 578–585 (2021).
60.	 Fink, Z. W., Martinez, V., Alti, J. & Ladner, J. T. PepSIRF: a flexible and comprehensive tool 
for the analysis of data from highly-multiplexed DNA-barcoded peptide assays. Preprint 
at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2007.05050 (2024).
61.	
Beaton, K. H., Huffman, W. C. & Schubert, M. C. Binocular misalignments elicited by 
altered gravity provide evidence for nonlinear central compensation. Front. Syst. 
Neurosci. 9, 81 (2015).
62.	 Karmali, F., Ramat, S. & Shelhamer, M. Vertical skew due to changes in gravitoinertial 
force: a possible consequence of otolith asymmetry. J. Vestib. Res. 16, 117–125 (2006).
63.	 Markham, C. H., Diamond, S. G. & Stoller, D. F. Parabolic flight reveals independent 
binocular control of otolith-induced eye torsion. Arch. Ital. Biol. 138, 73–86 (2000).
64.	 Karmali, F. Vertical eye misalignments during pitch rotation and vertical translation: 
evidence for bilateral asymmetries and plasticity in the otolith-ocular reflex. PhD thesis, 
Johns Hopkins Univ. (2007).
65.	 Beaton, K. H., Shelhamer, M. J., Roberts, D. C. & Schubert, M. C. A rapid quantification of 
binocular misalignment without recording eye movements: vertical and torsional 
alignment nulling. J. Neurosci. Methods 283, 7–14 (2017).
66.	 Basner, M. et al. Continuous and intermittent artificial gravity as a countermeasure to  
the cognitive effects of 60 days of head-down tilt bed rest. Front. Physiol. 12, 643854 
(2021).
67.	
Basner, M. et al. Effects of head-down tilt bed rest plus elevated CO2 on cognitive 
performance. J. Appl. Physiol. 130, 1235–1246 (2021).
68.	 Smith, M. G. et al. Effects of six weeks of chronic sleep restriction with weekend recovery 
on cognitive performance and wellbeing in high-performing adults. Sleep 44, zsab051 
(2021).
69.	 Basner, M. et al. Cognition test battery: adjusting for practice and stimulus set effects for 
varying administration intervals in high performing individuals. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 
42, 516–529 (2020).
70.	 Moore, T. M. et al. Validation of the cognition test battery for spaceflight in a sample of 
highly educated adults. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 88, 937–946 (2017).
71.	
Berrios, D. C. et al. NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics data. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D1515–D1522 (2021).
72.	 Scott, R. T. et al. Advancing the integration of biosciences data sharing to further enable 
space exploration. Cell Rep. 33, 108441 (2020).
Acknowledgements C.E.M. thanks I. Tulchinsky and WorldQuant, The GI Research Foundation, 
NASA (NNX14AH50G, NNX17AB26G, 80NSSC22K0254, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2, Translational 
Research Institute for Space Health (TRISH)/NNX16AO69A), the National Institutes of Health 
(R01MH117406, P01CA214274 R01CA249054, R01AI151059, U54AG089334) and the Leukemia 
and Lymphoma Society MCL7001-18, 7029-23). E.G.O. thanks Quest Diagnostics and G. Pajot 
for logistical support across multiple biospecimen collection locations. We also thank the 
Epigenomics and SCU Cores at WCM, the GI Research Foundation (GIRF) and Radvinsky family, 
and J.J. Hastings for help in the mission logistics. The NASA Open Science Data Repositories 
thanks the NASA Space Biology Program and the NASA Human Research Program. F.Z., J.L., 
J.G., J.A.A., A.F. and A.J.S. were supported under NASA contract NNX 16A069A/CAT0001, 
TRISH through NASA Cooperative Agreement NNX16AO69A, and NIAID 1U01AI148307-01 and 
U24AI152172. We also thank M. Zubaidi, M. McNeely and P. Luk at GattaCo for providing the 
plasma separation cartridges, and G. Nelson and H. Mead for assistance running PepSeq 
assays. A.E.S., D.J.E., A.E., M.B., A.J.E., C.E.M, C.W.J., E.M.B., M.I.H., E.U., D.B.D., M.S., M.S.S., 
M.C.S., N.N.A., A.M., J.M. and J.H.W. were supported by the Translational Research Institute for 
Space Health (TRISH) through NASA Cooperative Agreement NNX16AO69A. D.B.D. and E.U. 
thank John Wright Allen, Amara Azobu and Leanne Scott at Baylor College of Medicine for 
helping put in place the Federal Wide Assurance at SpaceX.  
Author contributions J.H.W., D.B.D., J.M., A.E.S., M. Shelhamer, F.Z., E.M.B., M.B. and C.E.M. 
conceived the study. E.G.O., J.L., A.J.E., M.M., E.E.A., D.J.E., A.E., M.C.S., A.M., J.G., J.A.A., A.F., 
M.I.H., D.L., S.M., M.L., A.S.M., D.B.D., E.U., J.M., A.E.S., M. Shelhamer, F.Z., E.M.B., M.B. and 
C.E.M. designed the experiments. C.W.J., E.G.O., J.L., A.J.E., K.R., B.T., N.D., J.K., A.J.S., A.F., N.B., 
S.M., M.L., A.S.M., J.M., M.B. and C.E.M. prepared and/or collected samples. C.W.J., E.G.O., J.L., 
A.J.E., K.R., N.D., J.K., A.J.S., J.A.A., A.F., R.K., V.O., M.Y., L.P., I.M., J.M., M.B. and C.E.M. generated 
the data. C.W.J., E.G.O., J.L., A.J.E., C.M., B.T., J.F., J.P., T.N., M.S., S.G.B., B.A., U.A.T., L.N., P.M., 
C.O.P., S.A.K., D.J.E., A.E., N.N.A., M.S.S., J.K., N.H., K.G., S.G.M., J.A.A., A.C.S., J.M., A.E.S., 
M. Shelhamer, M. Suhail, F.Z., M.B. and C.E.M. analysed the data. C.W.J., E.G.O., M.B. and C.E.M. 
prepared the manuscript. D.B.D., E.U., J.M., A.E.S., M. Shelhamer, F.Z. and E.M.B. are senior 
authors for the Inspiration4 mission. All authors reviewed and approved the manuscript.
Competing interests C.E.M. is a co-founder of BioAstra. The remaining authors declare no 
competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07648-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Mathias Basner or 
Christopher E. Mason.
Peer review information Nature thanks Jochen Schwenk, Balazs Aczel and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.

Extended Data Fig. 1 | The environmental, physiological, cognitive, 
imaging, and omics measures collected across Inspiration4 mission 
phases and their sampling frequency. To assess the effect of short-duration 
spaceflight on an all-civilian crew, data were collected on myriad domains 
using various methodologies (colors, left) before, during, and after flight 
spanning human biometrics, virome, cognition, spacecraft environment,  
and multi-omics assays. Green circles denote samples collected on Earth  
(i.e., pre-flight, post-flight) and blue diamonds denote data collected in-flight, 
along with their respective assays. For the timing of data collection, data 
collected during the pre-flight period is presented as the number of days prior 
to launch (L) and data collected in the post-flight period is presented as the 
number of days following return (R) to Earth. Data with continual collection 
(e.g. cabin measurements) are shown as bracketed time periods.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 2 | SOMA biosample collections during the Inspiration4 
mission. Sample types and downstream assays performed for multi-omic  
and clinical biomarkers. A variety of blood derivatives were collected via 
venipuncture. Samples that have not yet been sequenced are biobanked.  
EVP = extracellular vesicles and particles. Env = environment. Created with 
BioRender.com.

Extended Data Fig. 3 | Paper-based multiplexed microgravity-adapted 
vertical flow assay (0g-VFI). a, Annotated exploded view of the 0g-VFI. PES, 
polyethersulfone. b, Pictures of the packaged 0g-VFI kit as stored in the Dragon 
(left) and the three different components of the 0g-VFI: (1) membrane housing 
with the magnifier cap, (2) assay buffer pad capsule and (3) washing buffer pad 
capsule. c, Schematic overview of the complete assay operation as performed 
during the mission, from the blood collection by fingerstick to the visual 
detection of the immunoglobulin M (IgM) and C-reactive protein (CRP) values, 
passing by the plasma separation using the Gattaco® cartridge and the 
different incubation and washing steps. d, Representative images of 0g-VFI 
membranes showing the multiplexing performance (top) and graphical 
quantification (bottom) of the values obtained when membranes were either 
incubated with no samples (ø), IgM only, CRP only or in multiplex with 
IgM + CRP (Data presented are mean ± SEM from three independent 0g-VFI 
(n = 3). e, Graph representing the average volume of assay buffer transferred to 
the absorbing pad when the 0g-VFI was used in microgravity during the I4 
mission (Data presented are mean ± SEM; n = 3). Pictures show absorbing pads 
from two different 0g-VFI kits used in-flight with diameter of wet area (red 
circles), which informs the volume of assay buffer transferred from the wet pad 
during operation. f, Visual comparison of 0g-VFI membranes from kits stored 
in the lab and performed following standard protocol with 15 min incubation (i) 
with kits stored in the Dragon capsule and run in-flight for 15 min (ii) or 
post-flight for 90 min (iii).

Article
Extended Data Fig. 4 | 0g-Vertical Flow Immunoassay (VFI) analytical 
performance and quality control metrics. a, 0g-VFI intensity for C-reactive 
protein (CRP) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) spots are a function of CRP and  
IgM concentration on multiplex membranes. CRP and IgM samples were 
assayed from three independent 0g-VFI (n = 3) and each CRP and IgM data point 
presented is the mean ± SEM of the triplicate. For each CRP and IgM plot, a 
four-parameter logistic model was used to generate the fitted curve and the 
limit of detection (LOD), represented as a dotted line, was determined using 
the following formula: 
x
σ
LOD =
+ 3
negC
negC, where LOD is equal to the mean of 
the negative control (negC) + 3 standard deviations (σ) of the negative control. 
b, Intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation (CV) across CRP and IgM 
assays are presented; CVs were calculated by CV (%) = (Standard Deviation/
Mean) x 100. For the inter-assay CV, each point represents the CV of the control 
spots obtained from three independent identical replicates of 7 CRP and IgM 
0g-VFI membranes (n = 14). For the intra-assay CV, each point represents the  
CV of the three control spots obtained within the same membranes from 43 
independent CRP and IgM 0g-VFI. c, Representative intensity distribution 
across 0g-VFI membranes. The plot shows three IgM spots from three 
independent 0g-VFI membranes (R1, R2, and R3) exposed to an IgM 
concentration of 1 μg/mL; the average of the three IgM spots is presented in 
black.

Extended Data Fig. 5 | Accelerated stability studies of 0g-VFI devices. 
0g-VFI devices were packed: 1) in the presence of a hygroscopic substance 
(Desiccation, D) or 2) no hygroscopic substance (No desiccation, ø) and stored 
in an environmental chamber at 42 °C and 75% humidity. a, Representative 
0g-VFI membranes packed with (D) and without (ø) desiccation. b, C-reactive 
protein (CRP) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) quantification after a 3-day 
incubation. Data presented are mean ± SEM from three independent 0g-VFI 
(n = 3).

Article
Extended Data Fig. 6 | Ocular misalignment before and after short- 
duration spaceflight. Data as presented in Fig. 5. Red boxes indicate the 
grouping, for each astronaut, of pre-flight and the post-flight tests; an asterisk 
(*) denotes astronauts who experienced space motion sickness (SMS) in-flight. 
This shows consistency of pre-flight and post-flight tests in the non-SMS 
astronauts (C001 and C003). Vertical offsets of the boxes in each graph show 
change from pre-flight to post-flight, indicative of adaptive change during 
flight (larger adaptive change associated with lack of SMS). Boxes are drawn 
manually, to enclose the median in each case.

Extended Data Fig. 7 | Cardiovascular responses to short-duration 
spaceflight. a, One-hour averages of astronaut heart rate (HR) measured 
across all mission phases (N = 424). b, One-hour averages of astronaut heart 
rate variability (HRV), a measure of parasympathetic regulation of cardiac 
function, derived from heart period data using the standard deviation of R-R 
intervals across mission phases (N = 127). c, Scatter plot of astronaut blood 
oxygen saturation across mission phases (N = 177); blood oxygenation 
measurements failed in two astronauts in-flight. d, Scatter plot of one-hour 
averages of astronaut energy consumption across mission phases (N = 502).  
e, Average hourly HR for each mission phase. f, Average hourly HRV for each 
mission phase. g, Average hourly blood oxygen saturation for each mission 
phase. h, Average hourly energy consumption for each mission phase. For 
panels e-h, mean ± SEM with the n for each astronaut during that mission phase. 
Differences in cardiometabolic measures in-flight and post-flight relative to 
pre-flight were evaluated using mixed-effect models that nested repeated 
measures within astronauts contrasting the in-flight and post-flight periods 
with pre-flight; P-values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the 
false discovery rate method51 and adjusted significant associations are 
denoted as: *P < 0.05; ****P < 0.0001.

Article
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Profiles of the spacecraft environment during 
short-duration spaceflight. a, One-minute averages of cabin pressure of the 
spacecraft measured throughout the Inspiration4 mission (FD: flight day).  
b, One-minute averages of temperature in the spacecraft. c, One-minute 
averages of partial pressure of Oxygen (O2) in the spacecraft. d, One-minute 
averages of relative humidity in the spacecraft. e, Scatter plot of sound 
pressure levels for each astronaut, measured using the Apple Watch, across 
mission phases; sound pressure levels were averaged arithmetically, and each 
point represents a one-hour average (N = 797). f, Scatter plot of barometric 
pressure levels for each astronaut, measured using the Apple Watch, across 
mission phases; each point represents a one-hour average (N = 177). g, Average 
sound pressure level for each astronaut during each mission phase (mean ± SEM), 
which was sampled twice per hour by the Apple Watch (N = 797). Sound 
pressure levels were similar in-flight relative to pre-flight for three of the four 
astronauts; one astronaut was exposed to higher sound pressure levels (C001; 
β = −7.152; P < 0.0001) in-flight. h, Average barometric pressure level for each 
astronaut during each mission phase. For panels g and h, mean ± SEM with  
the n for each astronaut during that mission phase. Differences in-flight and 
post-flight relative to pre-flight were evaluated using mixed-effect models 
contrasting the in-flight and post-flight periods with pre-flight; post-hoc 
analyses testing for differences between astronauts were corrected for 
multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate method51. Significant 
associations are adjusted for multiple comparisons: *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; 
****P < 0.0001.

Extended Data Fig. 9 | Profiles of astronaut cognitive performance on 
Cognition assays across mission phases. Performance on each of the 10 
Cognition tests is indexed by response speed in the left panel and accuracy in 
the right panel for each astronaut across mission phases (N = 26 Cognition 
administrations). For response speed outcomes, higher values represent 
slower response speeds; response speed on the Psychomotor Vigilance  
Test is inverted to match the direction of other Cognition speed metrics. For 
accuracy outcomes, higher values represent more accurate performance.  
a, Psychomotor Vigilance Test (PVT). b, Matrix Reasoning Test (MRT). c, Abstract 
Matching (AM). d, Line Orientation Test (LOT). e, Visual Object Learning Test 
(VOLT). f, Motor Praxis Task (MP). g, Emotion Recognition Test (ERT). h, Digit- 
Symbol Substitution Task (DSST). i, Fractal 2-Back (F2B). j, Balloon Analog Risk 
Test (BART). k, Aggregate Cognition speed and accuracy across tests (data for 
each test were standardized before averaging; BART risk taking does not 
contribute to the accuracy score across tests).

Article
Extended Data Fig. 10 | Astronaut report of behavioral states across 
mission phases. Astronauts (N = 4) reported on their sleep duration and 
behavioral state using the Alertness and Mood Survey (AMS)50. For all 10 AMS 
items (panels b-k), astronauts rated their behavioral state using 11-point 
Likert-type scales for each item during all three phases of the mission (N = 26 
for each item). AMS items are plotted on the full range of each scale and higher 
numbers represent higher ratings in the direction of the item at the bottom of 
each panel (e.g., for Poor Sleep Quality, a higher number represents worse 
sleep quality). For all AMS items except sleep quality and workload, astronauts 
were prompted to rate “how are you feeling right now?” a, Sleep duration 
(derived from self-reported sleep and wake-up times). b, Sleep quality 
(question: “How was the quality of your sleep?”; anchors: good—poor). c, High 
workload (question: “What was today’s workload?”; anchors: very low—very 
high). d, Sleepiness (anchors: not sleepy at all—very sleepy). e, Physical 
exhaustion (anchors: energetic—physically exhausted). f, Sickness (anchors: 
healthy—sick). g, Depressed (anchors: not depressed at all—very depressed).  
h, Unhappiness (anchors: happy—unhappy). i, Bored (anchors: good—poor).  
j, Monotonous (anchors: good—poor). k, Stressed (anchors: not stressed at all—
very stressed).

μ
