iScience
Article
NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline:
standardized processing of short-read RNA-
seq data
Eliah G. Overbey,
Amanda M.
Saravia-Butler,
Zhe Zhang, ..., Luis
Zea, Sylvain V.
Costes, Jonathan
M. Galazka
sylvain.v.costes@nasa.gov
(S.V.C.)
jonathan.m.galazka@nasa.gov
(J.M.G.)
Highlights
Analysis of omics data
from different spaceﬂight
studies presents unique
challenges
A standardized pipeline
for RNA-seq analysis
eliminates data
processing variation
The GeneLab RNA-seq
pipeline includes QC,
trimming, mapping,
quantiﬁcation, and DGE
Space-relevant data
processed with this
pipeline are available at
genelab.nasa.gov
Overbey et al., iScience 24,
102361
April 23, 2021
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2021.102361
ll
OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article
NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus
pipeline: standardized processing
of short-read RNA-seq data
Eliah G. Overbey,1,39 Amanda M. Saravia-Butler,2,3,39 Zhe Zhang,4 Komal S. Rathi,4 Homer Fogle,5,3
Willian A. da Silveira,6 Richard J. Barker,7 Joseph J. Bass,8 Afshin Beheshti,37,38 Daniel C. Berrios,3
Elizabeth A. Blaber,9 Egle Cekanaviciute,3 Helio A. Costa,10 Laurence B. Davin,11 Kathleen M. Fisch,12
Samrawit G. Gebre,3,37 Matthew Geniza,13 Rachel Gilbert,14 Simon Gilroy,7 Gary Hardiman,6,15 Rau´ l Herranz,16
Yared H. Kidane,17 Colin P.S. Kruse,18 Michael D. Lee,19,20 Ted Liefeld,21 Norman G. Lewis,11
J. Tyson McDonald,22 Robert Meller,23 Tejaswini Mishra,24 Imara Y. Perera,25 Shayoni Ray,26 Sigrid S. Reinsch,3
Sara Brin Rosenthal,12 Michael Strong,27 Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,28 Candice G.T. Tahimic,29 Deanne M. Taylor,30
Joshua P. Vandenbrink,31 Alicia Villacampa,16 Silvio Weging,32 Chris Wolverton,33 Sarah E. Wyatt,34,35 Luis Zea,36
Sylvain V. Costes,3,* and Jonathan M. Galazka3,40,*
SUMMARY
With the development of transcriptomic technologies, we are able to quantify
precise changes in gene expression proﬁles from astronauts and other organisms
exposed to spaceﬂight. Members of NASA GeneLab and GeneLab-associated
analysis working groups (AWGs) have developed a consensus pipeline for
analyzing short-read RNA-sequencing data from spaceﬂight-associated experi-
ments. The pipeline includes quality control, read trimming, mapping, and gene
quantiﬁcation steps, culminating in the detection of differentially expressed
genes. This data analysis pipeline and the results of its execution using data sub-
mitted to GeneLab are now all publicly available through the GeneLab database.
We present here the full details and rationale for the construction of this pipeline
in order to promote transparency, reproducibility, and reusability of pipeline
data; to provide a template for data processing of future spaceﬂight-relevant da-
tasets; and to encourage cross-analysis of data from other databases with the
data available in GeneLab.
INTRODUCTION
Opportunities to perform biological studies in space are rare due to high costs and a limited number of
funding sources, rocket launches, and spaceﬂight crew hours for experimental procedures. In addition,
spaceﬂight research is decentralized and distributed across numerous laboratories in the United States
and abroad. As a result, studies performed in different laboratories often utilize different organisms,
strains, cell lines, and experimental procedures. Adding to this complexity are variance in spaceﬂight fac-
tors and/or confounders within each study, such as degree of radiation exposure, experiment duration,
CO2 concentration, light cycle, and water availability, all of which can have effects on an organism’s health
and gene expression proﬁles during spaceﬂight (Rutter et al., 2020). In order to optimize the integration of
data from this diverse array of spaceﬂight experiments, it is paramount that variations in data processing
are minimized.
There is presently no consensus on how best to analyze RNA-seq data, and the impact of analysis tool se-
lection on results is an active ﬁeld of research. Indeed, selections of trimming parameters (Williams et al.,
2016), read aligner (Yang et al., 2015), quantiﬁcation tool (Teng et al., 2016), and differential expression
detection algorithm (Costa-Silva et al. 2017) all affect results. Because of such challenges, groups such
as ENCODE and MINSEQE have developed standardized analysis pipelines for better comparison of
RNA-seq datasets (ENCODE Project Consortium et al., 2020; Functional Genomics Data Society, 2012).
1Department of Genome
Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA
98195, USA
2Logyx, LLC, Mountain View,
CA 94043, USA
3Space Biosciences Division,
NASA Ames Research
Center, Moffett Field, CA
94035, USA
4Department of Biomedical
and Health Informatics, The
Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA
5The Bionetics Corporation,
NASA Ames Research
Center, Moffett Field, CA
94035, USA
6Institute for Global Food
Security (IGFS) & School of
Biological Sciences, Queen’s
University Belfast, Belfast, UK
7Department of Botany,
University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53706, USA
8MRC Versus Arthritis Centre
for Musculoskeletal Ageing
Research, Royal Derby
Hospital, University of
Nottingham & National
Institute for Health Research
Nottingham Biomedical
Research Centre, Derby DE22
3DT, UK
9Center for Biotechnology
and Interdisciplinary Studies,
Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, Troy,
NY 12180, USA
10Departments of Pathology,
and of Biomedical Data
Continued
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS

The NASA GeneLab database (https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/projects) was created as a
central repository for spaceﬂight-related omics-data. The repository includes data from experiments
that proﬁle transcription (RNA-seq, microarray), DNA/RNA methylation, protein expression, metabolite
pools, and metagenomes. The most prevalent data type in this repository is RNA-seq from organisms
exposed to spaceﬂight conditions. As of August 2020, the NASA GeneLab database has over eighty data-
sets with RNA-sequencing data (Table S1). These datasets include Homo sapiens (human), Mus musculus
(mouse), Drosophila melanogaster (fruit ﬂy), Arabidopsis thaliana (model higher plant), Oryzias latipes
(Japanese rice ﬁsh), Helix lucorum (land snail), Brassica rapa (Fast Plant), Eruca vesicaria (arugula/edible
plant), Euprymna scolopes (Hawaiian bobtail squid), Ceratopteris richardii (aquatic fern), and the bacte-
rium, Bacillus subtilis from experiments performed during true spaceﬂight on various orbital platforms
such as the Space Shuttle and International Space Station (ISS), as well as spaceﬂight-analog studies,
such as hindlimb unloading and bed rest studies (Berrios et al., 2020).
NASA’s GeneLab and Ames Life Sciences Data Archive (ALSDA) projects have put forward an ambitious
strategy focused on integrating data, metadata, and biospecimens to fully utilize the 40+ years of archived
NASA Life Sciences data (Scott et al., 2020). One of the ﬁrst steps in this effort is the ability to analyze how
experimental factors common to multiple datasets impact molecular signaling. Such meta-analysis can
only occur if metadata, data, and processed data are harmonized. As part of this strategy, GeneLab
engaged with the scientiﬁc community and held its ﬁrst Analysis Working Group (AWG) workshop in
2018. Spaceﬂight researchers from universities and organizations across the United States and abroad
met to begin the creation of a standardized, consensus data-processing pipeline for one of the most com-
mon types of spaceﬂight datasets: transcription proﬁling via RNA-sequencing. Scientists at this workshop
met to discuss the merits of various bioinformatic software tools for processing RNA-sequencing data and
ultimately agreed on a single pipeline of these tools.
The main driver for developing the consensus pipeline was to present consistently processed data to the
public, therefore making space-relevant multi-omics data more accessible and reusable. The overall goals
were (1) to get more consistently processed data to the public; (2) to provide output data from every step of
the consensus pipeline so users can download and use these ‘‘intermediate’’ data; (3) to support easier and
more consistent analysis of space-relevant data by users including those in the NASA AWGs; and (4) to
allow easier cross-analysis of experiments to identify effects that result from the spaceﬂight environment,
independent of confounding factors. In addition, many of these data in the GeneLab database have not
been previously analyzed, as their generation was relatively recent. Therefore, providing new and pro-
cessed datasets to the public allows biologists and others to more easily interpret these data and contrib-
utes signiﬁcantly to our collective knowledge of the effects of spaceﬂight on terrestrial organisms.
Here we present the RNA-seq consensus pipeline (RCP) developed by the GeneLab AWG along with the
rationale behind the tool settings and options selected. The RCP includes three distinct steps: data pre-
processing, data processing, and differential gene expression computation/annotation (Figure 1A). These
steps use tools for quality control (FastQC, MultiQC) (Andrews, 2010; Ewels et al., 2016), read trimming
(TrimGalore) (Krueger 2019), mapping (STAR) (Dobin et al., 2013), quantiﬁcation (RSEM) (Li and Dewey
2011), and differential gene expression calculation/annotation (DESeq2) (Love et al. 2014) (Figure 1B).
The RCP has been integrated into the GeneLab database, and ﬁles produced by the RCP for each RNA-
seq dataset hosted in GeneLab are and will continue to be publicly available for download.
RESULTS
Data pre-processing: quality control and trimming
There are three distinct steps to the RCP, the ﬁrst of which is data preprocessing (Figure 2A). The pipeline
begins with quality control (QC) of raw FASTQ ﬁles from a short-read Illumina sequencer using the FastQC
software (Andrews, 2010) (Figure 2B). FastQC is one of the most widely used QC programs for short-read
sequencing data. It provides information that can be used to assess sample and sequencing quality,
including base statistics, per base sequencing quality, per sequence quality scores, per base sequence
content, per base GC content, per sequence GC content, per base N content, sequence length distribu-
tions, sequence duplication levels, overrepresented sequences, and k-mer content.
The FastQC program is run on each individual sample ﬁle. However, reviewing the FastQC results for each
sample ﬁle can be tedious and time consuming. Experiments typically have many sample ﬁles (biological
Science, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305, USA
11Institute of Biological
Chemistry, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA
99164, USA
12Center for Computational
Biology & Bioinformatics,
Department of Medicine,
University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA
13Phylos Bioscience, Portland,
OR 97214, USA
14NASA Postdoctoral
Program, Universities Space
Research Association, NASA
Ames Research Center,
Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
15Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA
16Centro de Investigaciones
Biolo´ gicas Margarita Salas
(CSIC), Ramiro de Maeztu 9,
28040 Madrid, Spain
17Center for Pediatric Bone
Biology and Translational
Research, Texas Scottish Rite
Hospital for Children, 2222
Welborn St., Dallas, TX 75219,
USA
18Los Alamos National
Laboratory, Bioscience
Division, Los Alamos, NM
87545, USA
19Exobiology Branch, NASA
Ames Research Center,
Mountain View, CA 94035,
USA
20Blue Marble Space Institute
of Science, Seattle, WA
98154, USA
21Department of Medicine,
University of California San
Diego, San Diego, CA 92093,
USA
22Department of Radiation
Medicine, Georgetown
University Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20007, USA
23Department of
Neurobiology and
Pharmacology, Morehouse
School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA 30310, USA
24Department of Genetics,
Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA
25Department of Plant and
Microbial Biology, North
Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA
26NGM Biopharmaceuticals,
South San Francisco, CA
94080, USA
27National Jewish Health,
Center for Genes,
Environment, and Health,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

and/or technical replicates) for multiple experimental conditions (spaceﬂight, ground control, etc.). For this
reason, we also use the MultiQC package (Ewels et al., 2016) (Figure 2C) to create a summary statistics
report that includes the same quality control result categories from FastQC across all experiment samples.
After performing quality control on the raw FASTQ data, reads are trimmed using TrimGalore (Krueger
2019) to remove sequencing adapters and low-quality bases that would disrupt read mapping during
the data processing pipeline step (Figure 2D). TrimGalore is a wrapper program that uses the cutadapt pro-
gram (Martin 2011) for read trimming. TrimGalore was selected for the RCP due to its simpliﬁed command
line interface, thorough output of trimming metrics, and ability to automatically detect adapters. In this
A
B
Step 1
Data Preprocessing
Step 2A: 
Read Mapping
Step 3
Differential Gene 
Expression Calculation
FastQC
Raw FASTQ Files
MultiQC
TrimGalore
Trimmed FASTQ Files
FastQC
MultiQC
STAR: 
Map Reads
Transcriptome 
Mapped 
BAM Files
STAR: Build Reference
Genome
Mapped 
BAM Files
RSEM: 
Calculate Expression
Gene Count Files
Isoform Count Files
RSEM: Prepare Reference
Metadata File
Organisms File
DESeq2
Normalized Count Matrix
Table with differentially expressed 
genes (w/o ERCC data)
Table with differentially expressed 
genes (w/ ERCC data)
Quality Report
Quality Report
Step 1: Data Preprocessing
Step 2A: Read Mapping
Step 2B: Read Quantification
Step 3: Calculate Differential Gene Expression
Step 2B: 
Read Quantification
Step 2
Data Processing
Figure 1. GeneLab RNA-seq Consensus Pipeline (RCP)
(A) The three broad steps of the RCP. The RCP handles (1) data preprocessing to trim sequencing adapters and to provide
quality control metrics; (2) data processing to map reads to the reference genome and quantify the number of read counts
per gene; and (3) differential gene expression calculation, which will provide a list of differentially expressed genes that
can be sorted by adjusted p value and log fold-change.
(B) The full RCP annotated with tools, input ﬁles, and output ﬁles.
1400 Jackson Street, Denver,
CO 80206, USA
28Ohio Musculoskeletal and
Neurological Institute and
Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Ohio University,
Athens, OH 43147, USA
29Department of Biology,
University of North Florida,
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
30Department of Biomedical
and Health Informatics,
Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia and the
Department of Pediatrics,
Perelman School of
Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA
31Department of Biology,
Louisiana Tech University,
Ruston, LA 71272, USA
32Institute of Computer
Science, Martin-Luther
University Halle-Wittenberg,
Von-Seckendorff-Platz 1,
Halle 06120, Germany
33Department of Botany and
Microbiology, Ohio
Wesleyan University,
Delaware, OH, USA
34Department of
Environmental and Plant
Biology, Ohio University,
Athens, OH 45701, USA
35Interdisciplinary Program in
Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Ohio University,
Athens, OH 45701, USA
36BioServe Space
Technologies, Aerospace
Engineering Sciences
Department, University of
Colorado Boulder, Boulder
80303 USA
37KBR, NASA Ames Research
Center, Moffett Field, CA
94035, USA
38Stanley Center for
Psychiatric Research, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
39These authors contributed
equally
40Lead contact
*Correspondence:
sylvain.v.costes@nasa.gov
(S.V.C.),
jonathan.m.galazka@nasa.
gov (J.M.G.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2021.102361
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
3
iScience
Article

step, bases that are part of a sequencing adapter or of low quality are removed from each read, and reads
that become too short are subsequently removed. After trimming, the quality control programs, FastQC
and MultiQC, are again run on the trimmed FASTQ ﬁles for viewing the quality control metrics of the reads
that will be used for data processing. Once the data have been preprocessed, the sequenced reads are
ready for mapping and quantiﬁcation.
Data processing: read mapping and sample quantiﬁcation
In the data processing step (Figure 1; Step 2A), the trimmed reads are ﬁrst aligned to the reference genome
(Figure 3A) with STAR, a splice-aware aligner (Dobin et al., 2013). STAR must be run in two steps. The ﬁrst
A
B
FastQC
Parameters
fastqc -o /path/to/output/directory \
-t number_of_threads \
/path/to/input/files
Input data files
fastq.gz
Output data files
fastqc.html (FastQC report) 
fastqc.zip (FastQC raw data)
C
MultiQC
Parameters
multiqc -o /path/to/output/directory \
/path/to/fastqc/output/files
Input data files
fastqc.html (FastQC report) 
fastqc.zip (FastQC raw data)
Output data files
multiqc_report.html (multiqc report)
multiqc_data (directory containing multiqc raw data)
D
TrimGalore
Parameters
trim_galore --gzip \
--path_to_cutadapt /path/to/cutadapt \
--phred33 \
--illumina \ # if adapters are not illumina, replace with adapters used
--output_dir /path/to/TrimGalore/output/directory \
--paired \ # only for PE studies
/path/to/forward/reads /path/to/reverse/reads
# if SE, replace the last line with only /path/to/forward/reads
Input data files
*fastq.gz (raw reads)
Output data files
*fastq.gz (trimmed reads) 
*trimming_report.txt (trimming report) 
FastQC
Raw FastQ Files
MultiQC
TrimGalore
Trimmed FastQ Files
FastQC
MultiQC
Quality Report
Quality Report
pipeline step 2
Step 1: Data Preprocessing
Figure 2. Data preprocessing (pipeline step 1): quality control and trimming
(A) Data preprocessing pipeline. FastQ ﬁles from Illumina base-calling software are quality checked using FastQC and
MultiQC. Data are then trimmed using TrimGalore and are re-checked for quality; (B) ﬂags used for FastQC program; (C)
ﬂags used for MultiQC program; (D) ﬂags used for TrimGalore program; trimmed reads (*fastq.gz) are then used as input
data for FastQC (B) followed by MultiQC (C) to generate trimmed read quality metrics. Tool versions used to process each
dataset are included in the RNA-seq processing protocol in the GLDS Repository.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

step is to create indexed genome ﬁles (Figure 3B). These ﬁles are used to assist read mapping and only
need to be generated once for each reference genome ﬁle. This step requires reference FASTA and
GTF ﬁles (Table S2). Some datasets include the External RNA Control Consortium (ERCC) spike-in con-
trol—a pool of 96 synthetic RNAs with various lengths and GC content covering a 220 concentration range
(Jiang et al., 2011). If ERCC spike-ins were included, the spike-in FASTA and GTF ﬁles are appended to the
reference FASTA and GTF ﬁles, respectively. The second step of STAR mapping is to use the indexed refer-
ence genome and the trimmed reads from the preprocessing step in order to map the reads to the genome
and the transcriptome (Figure 3C). STAR will also produce genome mapped data, which can optionally be
A
B
C
Figure 3. Data processing (pipeline step 2A): read mapping
(A) Data processing pipeline. Trimmed reads are mapped to their reference genome and transcriptome with STAR. Gene
counts are then quantiﬁed with RSEM; (B) ﬂags used for generating the indexed STAR reference ﬁles; (C) ﬂags used for
mapping reads with STAR. Tool versions used to process each dataset are included in the RNA-seq processing protocol in
the GLDS Repository.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
5
iScience
Article

used to ﬁnd reads that map outside of annotated reference transcripts. STAR mapping output data are in
Binary Alignment Map (BAM) format, which has a separate entry for each mapped read and states which
transcript each read is mapped to. In order to improve the detection and quantiﬁcation of splice sites,
STAR is run in ‘‘two-pass mode.’’ Here, splice sites are detected in the initial mapping to the reference
and used to build a new reference that includes these splice sites. Reads are then re-mapped to this dynam-
ically generated reference to improve the quantiﬁcation of splice isoforms (Dobin et al., 2013). Users are
provided with these results (as per sample SJ.out ﬁles) for further analysis of differential splicing.
The second part of processing is quantifying the number of reads mapped to each annotated transcript
and gene (Figure 1A; Step 2B, Figure 4A). For this task, the RCP uses RSEM (Li and Dewey 2011). The
main reasons for using RSEM are its ability to account for reads that map to multiple transcripts and distin-
guish gene isoforms. In short-read sequencing experiments it is likely that some number of reads will map
to multiple regions in the genome. RSEM computes maximum likelihood abundance estimates to split the
read count across multiple genes. Similar to STAR, RSEM is run in two distinct phases (Figure 4A). The ﬁrst
phase uses the reference genome and GTF ﬁles (with or without ERCC as appropriate) (Table S2) to prepare
indexed genome ﬁles (Figure 4B). The second phase uses the indexed ﬁles and the mapped reads from
STAR to assign counts to each gene (Figure 4C). There are two output ﬁles generated for each sample:
counts assigned to genes and counts assigned to isoforms. Gene counts are used to calculate differential
gene expression. Isoform counts are also generated as an option to look at differential isoform expression
but are not used during differential gene expression calculation in the RCP. Once the RSEM count ﬁles are
generated, the data are used to compute differentially expressed genes. A list of the reference genomes
used in the GeneLab pipeline is available in Table S2 . These reference genomes were the most recent re-
leases at the time each STAR and RSEM indexed references were created. Although it is possible to run
STAR mapping through the RSEM toolkit, we elected not to do this because the alignment parameters
used in this case are from ENCODE’s STAR-RSEM pipeline and are not customizable. Thus, we would
have been precluded from using the precise mapping parameters agreed to by the GeneLab AWG.
We elected to adopt a mapping-based approach rather than rapidly quantifying the reads via a k-mer-
based counting algorithm, pseudo-aligners, or a quasi-mapping method that utilizes RNA-seq inference
procedures such as Kallisto (Bray et al., 2016) or Salmon (Patro et al., 2017) despite their speed advantages.
This is because alignment-free quantiﬁcation tools do not accurately quantify low-abundant and small
RNAs especially when biological variation is present (Wu et al., 2018). Furthermore, alignment of reads al-
lows for additional analyses beyond transcript and gene quantiﬁcation such as measurement of gene body
coverage and detection of novel transcripts.
There are several alignment-based mapping tools available and each has advantages and disadvantages.
An alignment tool that is sensitive to splice-isoforms is critical to accurately identify how expression of
splice-isoforms is affected by the spaceﬂight environment. DNA-speciﬁc aligners such as BWA (Li and Dur-
bin 2009) and Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009) cannot handle intron-sized gaps and thus an RNA-seq-spe-
ciﬁc aligner is needed (Baruzzo et al., 2017). In addition to splice-awareness, when selecting an aligner the
following criteria were also considered: ability to input both single- and paired-end reads, handle strand-
speciﬁc data, applicability to a variety of different model organisms with both low- and high-complexity
genomic regions, efﬁcient runtime and memory usage, ability to identify chimeric reads, high sensitivity,
low rate of false discovery, and ability to output both genome and transcriptome alignments. Several
studies have been conducted to compare the wide variety of available RNA-seq speciﬁc alignment tools,
and of these, the STAR aligner consistently performs better than or on par with the tools tested for the indi-
cated criteria (Baruzzo et al., 2017; Schaarschmidt et al., 2020; Raplee et al. 2019).
Differential gene expression calculations and addition of gene annotations
Once reads have been mapped and quantiﬁed, differential expression analysis is performed using the
DESeq2 R package (Figure 1; Step 3, Figure 5A). Unlike the previous steps, a custom R script (GeneLab_DG-
E_wERCC.R or GeneLab_DGE_noERCC.R) (Data S1and S2) is used to run DESeq2; to create both unnor-
malized and normalized counts tables; and to generate a differential gene expression (DGE) output table
containing normalized counts for each sample, DGE results, and gene annotations (Figure 5B). The Gen-
eLab DGE R script also creates computer-readable tables that are used by the GeneLab visualization portal
to generate various plots so users can easily view and begin interpreting the processed data. These scripts
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

are provided in the NASA GeneLab_Data_Processing Github repository (https://github.com/nasa/
GeneLab_Data_Processing). In the following sections we describe each step of these scripts in order.
The GeneLab DGE R script requires three inputs: the quantiﬁed count data from the previous (RSEM) step;
sample metadata from the Investigation, Study, and Assay (ISA) tables in the ISA.zip ﬁle (provided in the
GeneLab repository with each dataset) (Sansone et al., 2012; Rocca-Serra et al., 2010); and the organ-
isms.csv ﬁle (Table S3), which is used to specify the organism used in the study and relevant gene
RSEM
Prepare Reference
Parameters
rsem-prepare-reference --gtf /path/to/annotation/gtf/file \
/path/to/genome/fasta/file \
/path/to/RSEM/genome/directory/RSEM_ref_prefix
Input data files
.fasta (genome sequence) 
.gtf (genome annotation) 
Note that for analyzing samples with ERCC spike-in, the genome FASTA and 
GTF files should have the ERCC FASTA and GTF files appended to them.
Output data files
The following will be generated in the /RSEM/genome/directory
RSEM_ref_prefix.chrlist
RSEM_ref_prefix.grp
RSEM_ref_prefix.idx.fa
RSEM_ref_prefix.n2g.idx.fa
RSEM_ref_prefix.seq
RSEM_ref_prefix.ti
RSEM_ref_prefix.transcripts.fa
RSEM
Calculate Expression
Parameters
rsem-calculate-expression --num-threads NumberOfThreads \
--alignments \
--bam \
--paired-end \ # only for PE studies
--seed 12345 \
--estimate-rspd \
--no-bam-output \
--strandedness reverse \ # For Illumina TruSeq stranded protocols, reads are derived 
from the reverse strand
/path/to/*Aligned.toTranscriptome.out.bam \
/path/to/RSEM/genome/directory/RSEM_ref_prefix \
/path/to/RSEM/output/directory
Input data files
*Aligned.toTranscriptome.out.bam
RSEM indexed reference
Output data files
*genes.results (counts per gene)
*isoforms.results (counts per isoform)
*stat (directory containing the following stats files)
*cnt
*model
*theta
RSEM: 
Calculate Expression
Gene Count Files
Isoform Count Files
RSEM: Prepare Reference
Step 2B: Read Quantification
B
A
C
pipeline step 3
Figure 4. Data processing (pipeline step 2B): gene quantiﬁcation
(A) Data processing pipeline. Mapping results from STAR are quantiﬁed by RSEM; (B) parameters for RSEM indexed
reference ﬁles generation; (C) parameters for quantifying gene and isoform counts with RSEM. Tool versions used to
process each dataset are included in the RNA-seq processing protocol in the GLDS repository.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
7
iScience
Article

annotations to load. Because samples from some GeneLab RNA-seq datasets contain ERCC spike-in and
others do not, there are two versions of the GeneLab DGE R script, one for datasets with ERCC spike-in
(GeneLab_DGE_wERCC.R, Data S1) and one for those without (GeneLab_DGE_noERCC.R, Data S2). Prior
to running either script, paths to directories containing the input data and the output data location must be
deﬁned. Each script starts by deﬁning the organism used in the study, which should be consistent with the
name in the organisms.csv ﬁle so that it matches the abbreviations used in the PANTHER database (Mi et al.
2013; Thomas 2003) for that organism. Next, the metadata from the ISA.zip ﬁle are imported and formatted
for use with the DESeq2 package. During metadata formatting, groups for comparison are deﬁned based
on experimental factors, and a sample table is created to specify the group to which each sample belongs.
Next, a contrasts matrix is generated, which speciﬁes the groups that will be compared during DGE anal-
ysis; each group is compared with every other group in a pairwise manner in both directions (i.e. spaceﬂight
versus ground and ground versus spaceﬂight). This approach provides the user with the results for all
possible group comparisons, allowing each user to select the most relevant comparisons for their particular
scientiﬁc questions. After metadata formatting, the RSEM gene count data ﬁles from each sample are listed
and re-ordered (to match the order the samples appear in the metadata), then imported with the R pack-
age, tximport (Soneson et al., 2015), and sample names are assigned. Prior to running DESeq2, a value of 1
A
Metadata File
Organisms File
DESeq2
Normalized Count Matrix
Table with differentially expressed 
genes (w/o ERCC data)
Table with differentially expressed 
genes (w/ ERCC data)
Step 3: Calculate Differential Gene Expression
B
Output Type
Output File Name
(GeneLab_DGE_noERCC.R
and 
GeneLab_DGE_wERCC.R)
Output File Name 
(GeneLab_DGE_wERCC.R only)
Available with RNA-seq 
processed data in the 
GLDS Repository
(*)
Unnormalized_Counts.csv
Normalized_Counts.csv
contrasts.csv
differential_expression.csv
ERCCnorm_contrasts.csv
ERCC_Normalized_Counts.csv
ERCCnorm_differential_expression.csv
Used to generate 
interactive plots from 
RNA-seq processed data 
in the GLDS 
visualization portal
(**)
visualization_output_table.csv
visualization_PCA_table.csv
visualization_output_table_ERCCnorm.csv
visualization_PCA_table_ERCCnorm.csv
Used for internal QC 
and/or V&V
(#)
SampleTable.csv
ERCC_rawCounts_unfiltered.csv
ERCC_rawCounts_filtered.csv
Figure 5. Differential gene expression calculation (pipeline step 3)
(A) Data processing pipeline. The R program DESeq2 is run in order to determine which genes are differentially expressed
between experimental conditions using gene count ﬁles from RSEM.
(B) Output ﬁles generated. The table columns distinguish which script produces each output. The columns distinguish
how those output ﬁles are used.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

is added to genes with lengths of zero, which is necessary to make a DESeqDataSet object. A DESeqDa-
taSet object is then created using the formatted metadata and the count data that was imported with
tximport.
For datasets that contain samples with ERCC spike-in, we use the GeneLab_DGE_wERCC.R script (Data
S1). To reduce the possibility of skewing the data during DESeq2 normalization (McIntyre et al., 2011; Risso
et al., 2011; Conesa et al., 2016; Law et al., 2016), all genes that have a sum of less than 10 counts across all
samples are removed. The cutoff value of 10 is a best practice recommended by the DESeq2 tutorial on
Bioconductor. These ﬁltered data are then prepared for normalization and DGE analysis with DESeq2.
Because there is no consensus for whether or not ERCC-normalization improves the accuracy of the results
(Risso et al., 2014), the GeneLab project and its AWG members decided to perform the DGE analysis both
with and without ERCC-normalization (for datasets with samples containing ERCC spike-in).
To enable DESeq2 analysis with and without considering ERCC reads, the DESeqDataSet object is used to
create a DESeqDataSet object containing only ERCC reads. Because all samples must contain ERCC spike-
in for ERCC-normalization, the DESeqDataSet object containing only ERCC reads is used to identify and
remove any samples that do not contain ERCC reads. Next, a DESeqDataSet object containing only
non-ERCC reads is created by removing rows containing ERCC reads. These data are then used for DESeq2
analysis.
For DESeq2 analysis with ERCC-normalization (Data S2), the size factor object of the non-ERCC data is re-
placed with group B ERCC size factors for re-scaling in the ﬁrst DESeq2 step. Group B ERCC genes contain
the same concentration in both mix1 and mix 2. Therefore, only group B ERCC genes are used for gener-
ating the size factors for re-scaling duirng ERCC-normalization. For DESeq2 analysis without ERCC-normal-
ization, the DESeq2 default algorithm is applied to the DESeqDataSet object containing only non-ERCC
reads. The unnormalized and DESeq2-normalized count data as well as the sample table are then
outputted as CSV ﬁles. The ‘‘Unnormalized_Counts.csv,’’ ‘‘Normalized_Counts.csv,’’ and ‘‘ERCC_Normali-
zed_Counts.csv’’ ﬁles for each RNA-seq dataset are available in the GeneLab Data Repository; the ‘‘Sam-
pleTable.csv’’ ﬁle is used internally for verifying and validating the processed data prior to publication.
There are two types of hypothesis tests that can be run with DESeq2, the likelihood ratio test (LRT), which is
similar to an analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculation in linear regression and allows for comparison across
all groups, and the Wald test, in which the estimated standard error of a log2 fold change is used to
compare differences between two groups. The DGE step of the RCP performs both of these analyses. After
normalization, the DESeq2 likelihood ratio test design is applied to the normalized data (both ERCC- and
nonERCC-normalized data) to generate the F statistic p value, which is similar to an ANOVA p value and
reveals genes that are changed in any number of combinations of all factors deﬁned in the experiment.
To prepare for building a gene/pathway annotation database, the STRINGdb (Szklarczyk et al., 2019) and
PANTHER.db (Thomas 2003) libraries are loaded, and the organisms.csv ﬁle is read and used to indicate the
Bioconductor AnnotationData Package needed (Huber et al., 2015; Gentleman et al., 2004). The current
gene annotation database for the organism speciﬁed at the beginning of the R script is then loaded.
Next, DGE tables containing normalized counts for each sample, pairwise DGE results, and current gene
annotations as well as computer-readable DGE tables (that will be used for visualization) are created ﬁrst
with nonERCC-normalized data and then with ERCC-normalized data. For pairwise DGE analysis, ﬁrst
normalized count data are used to create two output tables: one that is used to create the human-readable
DGE output table provided to users with processed data for each dataset and the other respective com-
puter-readable DGE output table that contains additional columns and is used to visualize the data.
Next, normalized count data are iterated through Wald Tests to generate pairwise comparisons of all
groups based on the contrasts matrix that was generated during metadata formatting. The pairwise
DGE analysis results are then added as columns to both DGE output tables.
Then an annotation database is built by ﬁrst deﬁning the ‘‘keytype,’’ which indicates the primary type of
annotation used (for most GeneLab datasets this is ENSEMBL). The keytype is then used to map to anno-
tations in the organism-speciﬁc Bioconductor AnnotationData Package, and the following annotation col-
umns are added to the annotation database: SYMBOL, GENENAME, ENSEMBL (if not the primary),
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
9
iScience
Article

REFSEQ, and ENTREZID. STRING and GOSLIM annotation columns are also added to the annotation data-
base using the STRINGdb and PANTHER.db R packages, respectively. All of the aforementioned annota-
tion columns are added to the annotation database to enable users to perform downstream analyses
without having to map gene IDs themselves. Once the annotation database is complete, additional calcu-
lations are performed on the normalized count data before assembling the ﬁnal DGE output tables.
Means and standard deviations of normalized count data for each gene across all samples, and for sam-
ples within each respective group, are calculated and added as columns to the DGE output tables.
A column containing the F statistic p value, calculated previously, is also added to the DGE output
tables. The following columns are added only to the computer-readable DGE output table (used for
visualization): a column to indicate whether each gene (or pathway) is up- or downregulated for each
pairwise comparison, a column to indicate genes that are differentially expressed using a p value cutoff
of %0.1 and another column using a p value cutoff of %0.05, a column indicating the log2 of the p value
for each pairwise comparison and another column indicating the log2 of the adjusted p value, both of
which are used to create Volcano plots. After all columns are added to the DGE tables, both the human-
and computer-readable DGE tables are combined with the current annotation database to create the
complete human- and computer-readable DGE tables. An example of the complete human readable
DGE tables provided with processed RNAseq datasets in the GeneLab Data Repository is shown in
Tables 1 and 2. Principal component analysis (PCA) is also performed on the normalized count data
and used to create PCA plots for the GeneLab data visualization portal. DGE analysis of datasets without
ERCC spike-in is performed exactly the same way as the nonERCC-normalized approach described
above, except that no ERCC reads have to be removed from the DESeqDataSet object prior to DESeq
analysis.
Both the GeneLab_DGE_wERCC.R and the GeneLab_DGE_noERCC.R scripts produce the following
output ﬁles: Unnormalized_Counts.csv (*), Normalized_Counts.csv (*), SampleTable.csv (#), contrasts.csv
(*), differential_expression.csv (*), visualization_output_table.csv (**), visualization_PCA_table.csv (**) (Fig-
ure 5B). The GeneLab_DGE_wERCC.R script will also produce the following additional output ﬁles:
ERCC_rawCounts_unﬁltered.csv
(#),
ERCC_rawCounts_ﬁltered.csv
(#),
ERCCnorm_contrasts.csv
(*),
ERCC_Normalized_Counts.csv
(*),
ERCCnorm_differential_expression.csv
(*),
visualization_output_
table_ERCCnorm.csv (**), visualization_PCA_table_ERCCnorm.csv (**) (Tables 1 and 2).
To showcase the value of using a consensus pipeline and publishing the processed data from each step of the
pipeline,downstreamanalyseswereperformedusingprocesseddatafromselectsamplesfromRNAseqdatasets
hosted on GeneLab. One of the advantages of providing expression data of all samples in each dataset as well as
all possiblepairwise DGE comparisonsistoallowusers the ﬂexibility topickandchoosewhich samples and which
comparisonstheywouldliketofocuson.Thus,whenselectingsamplesfordownstreamanalysis,weexercisedthis
ﬂexibility and searched the GeneLab Data Repository for datasets/samples that met a speciﬁc set of criteria.
These criteria were as follows: (1) datasets that evaluated the same tissue (liver) from the same mouse strain
(C57BL/6) and sex (female), (2) only samples derived from animals ﬂown in space and respective ground control
samples, (3) studies that used the same preservation protocol(liversamples extracted from frozencarcasses post-
mission) and library preparation method (ribo-depletion), and (4) samples that contained ERCC spike-in to eval-
uate outputs with and without ERCC normalization. Select samples from two GeneLab datasets, GLDS-168 and
GLDS-245, met these criteria, and processed data including the Normalized_Counts.csv, differential_expres-
sion.csv, ERCC_Normalized_Counts.csv, and the ERCCnorm_differential_expression.csv ﬁles from these two da-
tasets were used for downstream analyses.
Table 1. Differential gene expression output table—annotations
TAIR
SYMBOL
GENENAME
REFSEQ
ENTREZID
STRING_id
GOSLIM_IDS
AT1G01010
ANAC001
NA
NM_099983
839580
3702.AT1G01010.1
NA
AT1G01020
ARV1
NA
NM_001035846
839569
3702.AT1G01020.1
GO:0005622, GO:0005737, .
AT1G01030
NGA3
NA
NM_001331244
839321
3702.AT1G01030.1
NA
AT1G01040
ASU1
Encodes a Dicer homolog .
NM_001197952
839574
3702.AT1G01040.2
NA
Truncated version of the differential_expression.csv ﬁle provided as GeneLab processed data for GLDS-251. The ﬁrst 7 columns of the differential gene expres-
sion output table contain gene IDs and annotations (for remainder of columns, refer to Table 2).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

Prior to downstream analysis, the processed data ﬁles were ﬁltered so that only samples that met the
criteria listed above were included. Because GLDS-168 contains samples from both the Rodent Research
1 (RR-1) and RR-3 missions and only the RR-1 mission met our ﬁrst criteria of using the C57BL/6 mouse strain,
RR-3 samples were removed from the process data ﬁles. GLDS-168 processed data ﬁles were subsequently
ﬁltered to remove all samples, except spaceﬂight (FLT) and respective ground control (GC) samples, to
meet the second criteria listed above. Lastly, because GLDS-168 contains a set of FLT and GC samples
that were spiked with ERCC and another set in which ERCC was not added, the later set of samples
were removed to meet the fourth criteria. GLDS-245 contains liver samples from the RR-6 mission, which
included a set of animals that were returned to earth alive after 30 days of spaceﬂight and another set
of animals that remained in space (aboard the ISS) for a total of 60 days before being sacriﬁced aboard
the ISS (note that there were respective control samples for each set of spaceﬂight animals described). The
former set of animals had their livers dissected immediately after euthanasia, whereas livers from the latter
set of animals were frozen in situ and dissected from frozen carcasses after return to earth. Thus, only the
later (ISS-terminal) set of FLT and respective GC samples met criteria 2 and 3, so the GLDS-245 processed
data ﬁles were ﬁltered to remove all other samples. In addition, because the downstream analyses focused
on the differences between FLT and GC samples in these two datasets, all other comparisons were
removed from the differential_expression.csv and ERCCnorm_differential_expression.csv ﬁles prior to
analysis.
The ﬁltered processed data ﬁles (available in Mendeley Data, Mendeley Data: https://doi.org/10.17632/
fv3kd6h7k4.1) were then used to create Principal Component Analysis (PCA) plots (Figures 6A, 6B, S1A,
and S1B), heatmaps containing the top 30 most signiﬁcant FLT versus GC differentially expressed (and an-
notated) genes (adj. p value <0.05 and |log2FC| > 1) (Figures 6C, 6D, S1C, and S1D), and to evaluate FLT
versus GC gene ontology (GO) differences using Gene Set Enrichment (GSEA) analysis (Tables 3 and S5).
These results can then be further evaluated to identify similarities and differences in gene expression be-
tween these two studies and draw novel conclusions about the effects of spaceﬂight that are consistent
across spaceﬂight experiments.
DISCUSSION
The differentially expressed genes calculated by the RCP can be further explored with a variety of tools de-
signed for higher-order analysis. For example, there are tools that can look for enriched pathways, gene
ontology terms, or protein and/or metabolite networks. Popular software tools among the GeneLab work-
ing group members include WebGestalt (Liao et al., 2019), STRING (Szklarczyk et al., 2019), GSEA (Subra-
manian et al., 2005), PIANO (Va¨ remo et al. 2013), Reactome (Szklarczyk et al., 2019), and ToppFun (Chen
et al., 2009). There is no universal consensus on which tools are the most useful for higher-order analysis
(Nguyen et al., 2019). RCP users are encouraged to try multiple tools in order to analyze their data from
a variety of perspectives.
The RCP has been designed to handle sequencing experiments that either lack or include the ERCC RNA
spike-in mix—a set of 96 polyadenylated RNAs that can be used during differential gene expression calcu-
lation to normalize read counts across samples (Munro et al., 2014). However, the use of normalization
Table 2. Differential gene expression output table—statistics
Norm. expr.
(sample A)
Log2fc
(comparison A)
P value
(comparison A)
Adj p value
(comparison A)
Mean (all
samples)
Stdev (all
samples)
LRT
p value
Mean
(group A)
Stdev
(group A)
263.864
0.078
0.648
0.848
198.735
31.756
0.484
225.550
36.759
200.493
0.341
0.033
0.198
147.061
19.197
0.740
174.839
24.073
19.040
0.691
0.137
NA
11.035
3.121
NA
15.706
2.889
644.811
0.126
0.366
0.655
669.586
68.327
1.000
688.123
76.969
Truncated version of the differential_expression.csv ﬁle provided as GeneLab processed data for GLDS-251. Following the seven columns of gene IDs and an-
notations (Table 1) are normalized gene expression data for each sample (Norm. expr. (sample A)) then results from all possible pairwise comparisons, including
log2 fold change (Log2fc (comparison A)), p values (P.value (comparison A)), and adjusted p values (Adj.p.value (comparison A)) calculated from the Wald Tests.
Next are the average gene expression (Mean (all samples)) and standard deviation (Stdev (all samples)) of all samples followed by the F-statistic p value gener-
ated from the likelihood ratio test (LRT.p.value), and the last set of columns are the average gene expressions (Group.Mean) and standard deviations (Group.-
Stdev) of samples within each group.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
11
iScience
Article

according to ERCC spike-ins remains controversial among AWG members, and Munro et al. suggested its
usage only for determining limit of detection of ratio (LODR), expression ratio variability, and measurement
bias (Munro et al., 2014). For this reason, ERCC normalization remains optional in the GeneLab pipeline,
and both kinds of DGE outputs are provided in the GeneLab database. In addition, ERCC spike-in could
have two other usages. First, it allows us to evaluate whether normalization succeeded in removing
Figure 6. Global and differential gene expression in spaceﬂight versus ground control liver samples from
GeneLab datasets
(A and B) Principal component analysis of global gene expression in spaceﬂight (FLT) and respective ground control (GC)
liver samples from the (A) Rodent Research 1 (RR-1) NASA Validation mission (GLDS-168) and (B) RR-6 ISS-terminal mission
(GLDS-245). Plots were generated using data in the normalized counts tables for each respective dataset on the NASA
GeneLab Data Repository.
(C and D) Heatmaps showing the top 30 differentially expressed genes in spaceﬂight (FLT) versus ground control (GC)
liver samples from the (C) Rodent Research 1 (RR-1) NASA Validation mission (GLDS-168) and (D) RR-6 ISS-terminal
mission (GLDS-245). Heatmaps were generated using data in the differential expression tables for each respective
dataset on the NASA GeneLab Data Repository and are colored by relative expression. Adj. p value < 0.05 and |log2FC| >
1. All samples included were derived from frozen carcasses post-mission and utilized the ribo-depletion library
preparation method.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

systemic bias between libraries by using methods such as Rlog and VST when normalizing the spike-in
RNAs along with all other genes. Second, most normalization methods of RNA-seq data assume that
most genes are not differentially expressed toward one direction. Comparing spike-in measurements be-
tween libraries will help us to estimate the validity of this assumption.
A high number of biological replicates can increase certainty in the differentially expressed genes deter-
mined by the RCP. However, conducting experiments in spaceﬂight often limits the number of biological
replicates that a researcher can include. Therefore, it is important to note that at least three biological
replicates are required for the pipeline, speciﬁcally for DESeq2, to perform its statistical methods. How-
ever, at least six replicates are suggested in order to minimize the false discovery rate (FDR) (Schurch et
al., 2016). Finally, RNA-seq datasets hosted on GeneLab that do not contain biological replicates are only
processed up until unnormalized (raw) counts are obtained, the step right before DESeq2 is used for
DGE calculation.
More advanced RCP users might have additional data inquiries that fall beyond the scope of this pipeline.
For this reason, there are two parts of the pipeline that include additional output that are not used in our
differential gene expression computation. The ﬁrst is in the output from STAR, mapping output is also pro-
vided in genomic coordinates. This is useful for obtaining reads that are mapped outside of the reference
transcriptome. For example, this may be used to ﬁnd novel genes, transcripts, or exons that have not yet
been annotated by consortiums. The second part of the pipeline with alternative output ﬁles is RSEM. This
also provides transcript-level counts that can be used to investigate differential isoform expression. More-
over, intermediate ﬁles are provided as outputs to allow users to use components of the pipeline that they
ﬁnd useful.
The GeneLab database also includes other types of transcriptomic data. As discussed in this article, the
RCP is not used for microarray data that are fundamentally different, and the AWG is still debating the
best approach for cross-dataset comparisons between microarrays. GeneLab also accepts data from
long read experiments, such as those produced by Paciﬁc Biosciences’ (PacBio) single-molecule real-
time (SMRT) sequencing (Roberts et al. 2013) and Oxford Nanopore Technologies’ (ONT) nanopore
sequencing (Jain et al., 2016). Long-read data would be processed with similar steps to the RCP but will
require tools speciﬁcally designed for the intricacies of long-read data, such as reads that contain multiple
splice junctions and reads that currently have a higher base-calling error rate. Currently, long-reads are
typically used for DNA sequencing and were recently highlighted on board of the ISS using ONT for de
novo assembly of the Escherichia coli genome from raw reads (Castro-Wallace et al., 2017). However,
even though throughput and accuracy remain far inferior to short-reads, long-reads offer some advantages
for RNA-seq as well, with less ambiguity for genes and isoforms detection, much faster mapping, potential
identiﬁcation of genes not yet known from reference genomes, and eventually less bias in DGE.
To conclude, the RCP is speciﬁcally designed for RNA-seq data from short-read sequencers and has
been developed in order to encourage and facilitate analysis of spaceﬂight multi-omic data. The creation
of the RCP by a large community of scientists (GeneLab AWG: https://genelab.nasa.gov/awg) and the
sharing of pipeline details in a peer-reviewed article provide analysis transparency and enable data
reproducibility.
Table 3. Comparison of gene ontology in spaceﬂight versus ground control liver samples from GeneLab datasets
GeneLab
dataset
# Enriched GO terms
(NOM p < 0.01)
# Enriched GO terms
(NOM p < 0.01 & FDR<0.5)
# Enriched GO terms
(NOM p < 0.01 & FDR<0.25)
GLDS-168
71, 135
0, 132
0, 0
GLDS-245
21, 24
2, 6
1, 0
The number of enriched gene ontology (GO) terms identiﬁed by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA, phenotype permu-
tation) was evaluated in spaceﬂight (FLT) versus ground control (GC) liver samples from the Rodent Research 1 (RR-1) NASA
Validation mission (GLDS-168), and RR-6 ISS-terminal mission (GLDS-245). For GO terms, the number on the left corresponds
to GO terms enriched in FLT samples and the number on the right corresponds to GO terms enriched in GC samples. These
data were generated using the normalized counts for each respective dataset on the NASA GeneLab Data Repository. All
samples included were derived from frozen carcasses post-mission and utilized the ribo-depletion library preparation
method. GLDS-168, FLT n = 5 and GC n = 5; GLDS-245, FLT n = 10 and GC n = 10. p values and FDR values are indicated.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
13
iScience
Article

Limitations of the study
The results of this study are limited to short-read RNA-seq and are not applicable to other transcriptomic
proﬁling methods (e.g. microarray, long-read RNA-seq). In addition, the pipeline cannot compensate for
poor library preparation technique or inadequate sample size. Sample preservation protocols between da-
tasets need to also be evaluated, because variations in sample preservation protocol could lead to poor
correlation between studies that are otherwise identical (Lai Polo et al., 2020). The number of sequenced
reads may also be a limiting factor in the usefulness and accuracy of the differentially expressed genes
calculated by DESeq2 and, similarly, during splice isoform analysis.
Note that this article does not discuss strategies and pipelines regarding older transcriptomics data in
GeneLab (i.e. more than 100 microarray datasets), as it is much more challenging to provide meta-analysis
with microarrays, which are prone to strong batch effects and gene lists that are platform dependent.
Future efforts of GeneLab and the AWG will address microarray pipelines.
In the future, we will add functionality to process unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) that can identify PCR
duplicates using tools such as UMI tools (Smith et al. 2017). This will allow PCR duplicates to be removed
after mapping and before quantiﬁcation.
In addition, transcriptomic data will be integrated with proteomic and metabolomics data; this will help
further understand the signiﬁcance of gene expression changes to metabolic ‘‘ﬁtness’’ in the spaceﬂight
environment.
Resource availability
Lead contact
Jonathan M. Galazka.
Materials availability
No unique reagents were generated in this study.
Data and code availability
Spaceﬂight-relevant RNA-seq data are located in the GeneLab database (https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.
gov/genelab/projects). All software packages are open source and are linked in the methods section. In-
structions for installing packages using Conda are provided on Github (https://github.com/nasa/
GeneLab_Data_Processing/tree/master/RNAseq/RNAseq_Tool_Instal). Custom R scripts for DESeq2 are
included as supplemental information and are available in the Github repository GeneLab_Data_Process-
ing (https://github.com/nasa/GeneLab_Data_Processing). Original data have been deposited to Mende-
ley Data: https://doi.org/10.17632/fv3kd6h7k4.1).
METHODS
All methods can be found in the accompanying transparent methods supplemental ﬁle.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded in part by the NASA Space Biology program within the NASA Science Mission Direc-
torate’s (SMD) Biological and Physical Sciences (BPS) Division, NASA award numbers NNX15AG56G,
80NSSC19K0132, the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (grant number BB/
N015894/1), the MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research (grant numbers MR/
P021220/1 and MR/R502364/1), the Spanish Research Agency (AEI grant number RTI2018-099309-B-I00,
co-funded by EU-ERDF), and the National Institute for Health Research Nottingham Biomedical Research
Centre. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or
the Department of Health and Social Care.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors developed the initial analysis scheme at the 2019 GeneLab AWG workshop. EGO, AMSB, ZZ,
KSR, HF, WAdS, RB, and JMG reﬁned this into a draft pipeline. EGO and AMSB wrote and validated the
ﬁnal processing scripts. EGO and AMSB wrote the original manuscript draft and generated ﬁgures. All au-
thors reviewed and edited the ﬁnal draft.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: September 8, 2020
Revised: October 30, 2020
Accepted: March 23, 2021
Published: April 23, 2021
REFERENCES
Andrews, S. (2010). FastQC: A Quality Control
Tool for High Throughput Sequence Data.
Babraham Bioinformatics (Babraham Institute).
Baruzzo, G., Hayer, K.E., Kim, E.J., Di Camillo, B.,
FitzGerald, G.A., and Grant, G.R. (2017).
Simulation-based comprehensive benchmarking
of RNA-seq aligners. Nat. Methods 14, 135–139.
Berrios, D.C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S.,
and Costes, S.V. (2020). NASA GeneLab:
interfaces for the exploration of space omics
data. Nucleic Acids Res. https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gkaa887.
Bray, N.L., Pimentel, H., Melsted, P., and Pachter,
L. (2016). Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq
quantiﬁcation. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 525–527.
Castro-Wallace, S.L., Chiu, C.Y., John, K.K., Stahl,
S.E., Rubins, K.H., McIntyre, A.B.R., Dworkin, J.P.,
Lupisella, M.L., Smith, D.J., Botkin, D.J., et al.
(2017). Nanopore DNA sequencing and genome
assembly on the International space station. Sci.
Rep. 7, 18022.
Chen, J., Bardes, E.E., Aronow, B.J., and Jegga,
A.G. (2009). ToppGene suite for gene list
enrichment analysis and candidate gene
prioritization. Nucleic Acids Res. 37, W305–W311.
Conesa, A., Madrigal, P., Tarazona, S., Gomez-
Cabrero, D., Cervera, A., McPherson, A.,
Szczesniak, M.W., Gaffney, D.J., Elo, L.L., Zhang,
X., et al. (2016). A survey of best practices for
RNA-seq data analysis. Genome Biol. 17, 13.
Costa-Silva, J., Domingues, D., and Lopes, F.M.
(2017). RNA-seq differential expression analysis:
an extended review and a software tool. PLoS
One 12, e0190152.
Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow,
J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut, P., Chaisson, M., and
Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal
RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21.
ENCODE Project Consortium, Snyder, M.P.,
Gingeras, T.R., Moore, J.E., Weng, Z., Gerstein,
M.B., Ren, B., Hardison, R.C.,
Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., Graveley, B.R., et al.
(2020). Perspectives on ENCODE. Nature 583,
693–698.
Ewels, P., Magnusson, M., Lundin, S., and Ka¨ller,
M. (2016). MultiQC: Summarize analysis results for
multiple tools and samples in a single report.
Bioinformatics 32, 3047–3048.
Functional Genomics Data Society (2012).
MINSEQE: Minimum Information about a high-
throughput SEQuencing Experiment (version
1.0). http://fged.org/projects/minseqe/.
Gentleman, R.C., Carey, V.J., Bates, D.M., Ben, B.,
Dettling, M., Dudoit, S., Ellis, B., Gautier, L., Ge,
Y., Gentry, J., et al. (2004). Bioconductor: open
software development for computational Biology
and bioinformatics. Genome Biol. 5, R80.
Huber, W., Carey, V.J., Gentleman, R., Anders, S.,
Carlson, M., Carvalho, B.S., Bravo, H.C., Davis, S.,
Gatto, L., Girke, T., et al. (2015). Orchestrating
high-throughput genomic analysis with
bioconductor. Nat. Methods 12, 115–121.
Jain, M., Olsen, H.E., Paten, B., and Akeson, M.
(2016). Erratum to: the Oxford nanopore MinION:
delivery of nanopore sequencing to the genomics
community. Genome Biol. 17, 256.
Jiang, L., Schlesinger, F., Davis, C.A., Zhang, Y., Li,
R., Salit, M., Gingeras, T.R., and Oliver, B. (2011).
Synthetic spike-in standards for RNA-seq
experiments. Genome Research. https://doi.org/
10.1101/gr.121095.111.
Krueger, F. (2019). Trim Galore: a wrapper around
cutadapt and FastQC to consistently apply
adapter and quality trimming to FastQ ﬁles, with
extra functionality for RRBS data (version 0.6.5).
https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore.
Lai Polo, S.-H., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Boyko, V.,
Dinh, M.T., Chen, Y.-C., Fogle, H., Reinsch, S.S.,
Ray, S., Chakravarty, K., Marcu, O., et al. (2020).
RNAseq analysis of rodent spaceﬂight
experiments is confounded by sample collection
techniques. iScience. https://doi.org/10.1101/
2020.07.18.209775.
Langmead, B., Cole, T., Pop, M., and Salzberg,
S.L. (2009). Ultrafast and memory-efﬁcient
alignment of short DNA sequences to the human
genome. Genome Biol. 10, R25.
Law, C.W., Alhamdoosh, M., Su, S., Dong, X.,
Tian, L., Smyth, G.K., and Ritchie, M.E. (2016).
RNA-seq analysis is easy as 1-2-3 with Limma,
Glimma and edgeR. F1000Res. 5, https://doi.org/
10.12688/f1000research.9005.3.
Liao, Y., Wang, J., Jaehnig, E.J., Shi, Z., and
Zhang, B. (2019). WebGestalt 2019: gene set
analysis toolkit with revamped UIs and APIs.
Nucleic Acids Res. 47, W199–W205.
Li, B., and Dewey, C.N. (2011). RSEM: accurate
transcript quantiﬁcation from RNA-seq data with
or without a reference genome. BMC
Bioinformatics 12, 323.
Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate
short read alignment with burrows-wheeler
transform. Bioinformatics. https://doi.org/10.
1093/bioinformatics/btp324.
Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014).
Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2.
Genome Biol. 15, 550.
Martin, M. (2011). Cutadapt removes adapter
sequences from high-throughput sequencing
reads. EMBnet. J. 17, 10–12.
McIntyre, L.M., Lopiano, K.K., Morse, A.M., Amin,
V., Oberg, A.L., Young, L.J., and Nuzhdin, S.V.
(2011). RNA-seq: technical variability and
sampling. BMC Genomics 12, 293.
Mi, H., Muruganujan, A., and Thomas, P.D. (2013).
PANTHER in 2013: modeling the evolution of
gene function, and other gene attributes, in the
context of phylogenetic trees. Nucleic Acids Res.
41, D377–D386.
Munro, S.A., Lund, S.P., Pine, P.S., Binder, H.,
Clevert, D.-A., Conesa, A., Dopazo, J., Fasold, M.,
Hochreiter, S., Hong, H., et al. (2014). Assessing
technical performance in differential gene
expression experiments with external spike-in
RNA control ratio mixtures. Nat. Commun. 5,
5125.
Nguyen, T.-M., Shaﬁ, A., Nguyen, T., and
Draghici, S. (2019). Identifying signiﬁcantly
impacted pathways: a comprehensive review and
assessment. Genome Biol. 20, 203.
Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M.I., Irizarry, R.A., and
Kingsford, C. (2017). Salmon provides fast and
bias-aware quantiﬁcation of transcript
expression. Nat. Methods 14, 417–419.
Raplee, I.D., Evsikov, A.V., and Marı´n de Evsikova,
C. (2019). Aligning the aligners: comparison of
RNA sequencing data alignment and gene
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
15
iScience
Article

expression quantiﬁcation tools for clinical breast
cancer research. J. Personalized Med. 9, https://
doi.org/10.3390/jpm9020018.
Risso, D., Ngai, J., Speed, T.P., and Dudoit, S.
(2014). Normalization of RNA-seq data using
factor Analysis of control genes or samples. Nat.
Biotechnol. 32, 896–902.
Risso, D., Schwartz, K., Sherlock, G., and Dudoit,
S. (2011). GC-content normalization for RNA-seq
data. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 480.
Roberts, R.J., Carneiro, M.O., and Schatz, M.C.
(2013). The advantages of SMRT sequencing.
Genome Biol. 14, 405.
Rocca-Serra, P., Brandizi, M., Maguire, E., Sklyar,
N., Taylor, C., Begley, K., Field, D., Harris, S.,
Hide, W., Hofmann, O., et al. (2010). ISA software
suite: supporting standards-compliant
experimental annotation and enabling curation
at the community level. Bioinformatics. https://
doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq415.
Rutter, L., Barker, R., Bezdan, D., Cope, H.,
Costes, S.V., Degoricija, L., Fisch, K.M., Gabitto,
M., Gebre, S., Giacomello, S., et al. (2020). A new
era for space Life science: International standards
for space omics processing (ISSOP). Patterns 1,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2020.100148.
Sansone, S.A., Rocca-Serra, P., Field, D., Maguire,
E., Taylor, C., Hofmann, O., Fang, H., Neumann,
S., Tong, W., Amaral-Zettler, L., et al. (2012).
Toward interoperable bioscience data. Nat.
Genet. 44, 121–126.
Schaarschmidt, S., Fischer, A., Zuther, E., and
Hincha, D.K. (2020). Evaluation of seven different
RNA-seq alignment tools based on experimental
data from the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms21051720.
Schurch, N.J., Schoﬁeld, P., Gierlinski, M., Cole,
C., Sherstnev, A., Singh, V., Wrobel, N., Gharbi,
K., Simpson, G., Owen-Hughes, T., et al. (2016).
How many biological replicates are needed in an
RNA-seq experiment and which differential
expression tool should you use? RNA. https://doi.
org/10.1261/rna.053959.115.
Scott, R.T., Grigorev, K., Mackintosh, G., Gebre,
S.G., Mason, C.E., Del Alto, M.E., and Costes, S.V.
(2020). Advancing the integration of Biosciences
data sharing to further enable space
exploration33 (Cell Rep.).
Smith, T., Heger, A., and Sudbery, I. (2017). UMI-
tools: modeling sequencing errors in unique
molecular identiﬁers to improve quantiﬁcation
accuracy. Genome Res. 27, 491–499.
Soneson, C., Love, M., and Robinson, M. (2015).
Differential analyses for RNA-seq: transcript-level
estimates improve gene-level inferences, [version
2; Peer Review: 2 Approved]. F1000Res. 4, 1521.
Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V.K.,
Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B.L., Gillette, M.A.,
Paulovich, A., Pomeroy, S.L., Golub, T.R., Lander,
E.S., et al. (2005). Gene set Enrichment analysis: a
knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 102, 15545–15550.
Szklarczyk, D., Gable, A.L., Lyon, D., and Junge,
A. (2019). STRING v11: protein–protein
association networks with increased coverage,
supporting functional discovery in genome-wide
experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids. https://
academic.oup.com/nar/article-abstract/47/D1/
D607/5198476.
Teng, M., Love, M.I., Davis, C.A., Djebali, S.,
Dobin, A., Graveley, B.R., Li, S., Mason, C.E.,
Olson, S., Pervouchine, D., et al. (2016). A
benchmark for RNA-seq quantiﬁcation pipelines.
Genome Biol. 17, 74.
Thomas, P.D. (2003). PANTHER: a library of
protein families and subfamilies indexed by
function. Genome Res. https://doi.org/10.1101/
gr.772403.
Va¨remo, L., Nielsen, J., and Nookaew, I. (2013).
Enriching the gene set analysis of genome-wide
data by incorporating directionality of gene
expression and combining statistical hypotheses
and methods. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, 4378–4391.
Williams, C.R., Baccarella, A., Parrish, J.Z., and
Kim, C.C. (2016). Trimming of sequence reads
alters RNA-seq gene expression estimates. BMC
Bioinformatics 17, 103.
Wu, D.C., Yao, J., Ho, K.S., Lambowitz, A.M., and
Wilke, C.O. (2018). Limitations of alignment-free
tools in total RNA-seq quantiﬁcation. BMC
Genomics 19, 510.
Yang, C., Wu, P.-Y., Tong, L., Phan, J.H., and
Wang, M.D. (2015). The impact of RNA-seq
aligners on gene expression estimation. ACM
BCM 2015, 462–471.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
iScience 24, 102361, April 23, 2021
iScience
Article

iScience, Volume 24
Supplemental information
NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus
pipeline: standardized processing
of short-read RNA-seq data
Eliah G. Overbey, Amanda M. Saravia-Butler, Zhe Zhang, Komal S. Rathi, Homer
Fogle, Willian A. da Silveira, Richard J. Barker, Joseph J. Bass, Afshin Beheshti, Daniel
C. Berrios, Elizabeth A. Blaber, Egle Cekanaviciute, Helio A. Costa, Laurence B.
Davin, Kathleen M. Fisch, Samrawit G. Gebre, Matthew Geniza, Rachel Gilbert, Simon
Gilroy, Gary Hardiman, Raúl Herranz, Yared H. Kidane, Colin P.S. Kruse, Michael D.
Lee, Ted Liefeld, Norman G. Lewis, J. Tyson McDonald, Robert Meller, Tejaswini
Mishra, Imara Y. Perera, Shayoni Ray, Sigrid S. Reinsch, Sara Brin Rosenthal, Michael
Strong, Nathaniel J. Szewczyk, Candice G.T. Tahimic, Deanne M. Taylor, Joshua P.
Vandenbrink, Alicia Villacampa, Silvio Weging, Chris Wolverton, Sarah E. Wyatt, Luis
Zea, Sylvain V. Costes, and Jonathan M. Galazka

Supplemental Information
Transparent Methods
The tools used in the consensus pipeline are documented in Supplemental Table 4: Pipeline
Tools and Links [Table S4: “Pipeline Tools and Links, Related to Transparent Methods”]. Due to NASA
security requirements, all software is updated monthly with security patching. Therefore, tool versions
used to process each RNA-seq dataset hosted on the GeneLab Data Repository are provided in the
RNA-seq protocol section and are also available along with exact processing scripts in the GeneLab
Data Processing GitHub Repository
(https://github.com/nasa/GeneLab_Data_Processing/tree/master/RNAseq/GLDS_Processing_Scripts).
Specific commands, options, and flags for each tool used in the RCP are reported in the figures of the
main text. Note that some packages listed here are dependencies of the packages used in the RCP. More
information about such dependencies can be found in the tool documentation.
This
pipeline
has
been
run
on
short-read
RNA-seq
data
in
the
GeneLab
database
(https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/projects) and is applied to new submissions to the database.
Any
updates
to
the
software
used
in
the
pipeline
will
be
noted
in
the
Github
repository
GeneLab_Data_Processing (https://github.com/nasa/GeneLab_Data_Processing). There are currently
over 80 RNA-seq datasets available [Table S1: “GeneLab RNA-Seq Datasets, Related to Transparent
Methods”].
Processed RNAseq data from GLDS-168 and GLDS-245 select samples were used to provide an
example of the downstream analyses that can be done using data processed with the consensus pipeline
presented here. Normalized counts and ERCC-normalized counts from the following GLDS-168 and
GLDS-245 samples were used to generate the PCA plots shown in Figure 6A & 6B and Supplemental
Figure 1A & 1B, respectively. Samples from GLDS-168 and GLDS-245 that were used in this study are
listed in Supplemental Table 5 [Table S5: “Sample Names, Related to Figure 6”]. Differential gene
expression (DGE) data from FLT versus GC samples using (non-ERCC) normalized counts and
ERCC-normalized counts data for each respective dataset were used to generate the heatmaps shown in
Figure 6C & 6D and Supplemental Figure 1C & 1D, respectively. DGE data were filtered using an adjusted
p value cutoff of < 0.05 and |log2FC| cutoff of > 1. The gene expression data were then sorted based on
adjusted p values and the top 30 most differentially expressed and annotated genes were used to
generate heatmaps with ggplot2 version 3.3.2 (Wickham, Navarro, and Pedersen 2016). Note that for
visualization purposes, sample names were shortened.
Pairwise gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed on the (non-ERCC) normalized
counts (Table 3) and ERCC-normalized counts [Table S6] from select samples in GLDS-168 and

GLDS-245 using the C5: Gene Ontology (GO) gene set (MSigDB v7.2) as described (Subramanian et al.
2005). All comparisons were performed using the phenotype permutation. The ranked lists of genes were
defined by the signal-to-noise metric and the statistical significance were determined by 1000
permutations of the gene set. FDR <= 0.25 were considered significant for comparisons according to the
authors’ recommendation.
The data used to generate all PCA plots, heatmaps, and GSEA shown are provided on Mendeley
(http://dx.doi.org/10.17632/fv3kd6h7k4.1).
Supplemental Figures

Figure S1 (Related to Figure 6). Global and differential gene expression in ERCC-normalized
spaceflight versus ground control liver samples from GeneLab datasets. A-B) Principal component
analysis of global gene expression in spaceflight (FLT) and respective ground control (GC) liver samples
from the A) Rodent Research 1 (RR-1) NASA Validation mission (GLDS-168) and B) RR-6 ISS-terminal
mission (GLDS-245). Plots were generated using data in the ERCC-normalized counts tables for each
respective dataset on the NASA GeneLab Data Repository. C-D) Heatmaps showing the top 30
differentially expressed genes in spaceflight (FLT) versus ground control (GC) liver samples from the C)
Rodent Research 1 (RR-1) NASA Validation mission (GLDS-168) and D) RR-6 ISS-terminal mission
(GLDS-245). Heatmaps were generated using data in the ERCC-normalized differential expression tables
for each respective dataset on the NASA GeneLab Data Repository. Adj. p-value < 0.05 and |log2FC| > 1.
All samples included were derived from frozen carcasses post-mission and utilized the ribo-depletion
library preparation method.
Supplemental Tables
GeneLab Dataset
# Enriched GO
terms
(NOM p<0.01)
# Enriched GO
terms (NOM
p<0.01 &
FDR<0.5)
# Enriched GO
terms (NOM
p<0.01 &
FDR<0.25)
GLDS-168
109, 13
0, 11
0, 0
GLDS-245
166, 0
81, 0
1, 0
Table S6 (Related to Table 3). Comparison of gene ontology in ERCC-normalized spaceflight
versus ground control liver samples from GeneLab datasets. The number of enriched gene ontology
(GO) terms identified by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA, phenotype permutation) was evaluated in
spaceflight (FLT) versus ground control (GC) liver samples from the Rodent Research 1 (RR-1) NASA
Validation mission (GLDS-168), and RR-6 ISS-terminal mission (GLDS-245). For GO terms, the number
on the left corresponds to GO terms enriched in FLT samples and the number on the right corresponds to
GO terms enriched in GC samples. These data were generated using the ERCC-normalized counts for
each respective dataset on the NASA GeneLab Data Repository. All samples included were derived from
frozen carcasses post-mission and utilized the ribo-depletion library preparation method. GLDS-168, FLT
n=5 and GC n=5; GLDS-245, FLT n=10 and GC n=10. p values and FDR values are indicated.
