ARTICLE
OPEN
Overexpression of catalase in mitochondria mitigates changes
in hippocampal cytokine expression following simulated
microgravity and isolation
Linda Rubinstein1,2, Ann-Soﬁe Schreurs2,3, Samantha M. Torres2,4, Sonette Steczina2,4, Moniece G. Lowe
2,4, Frederico Kiffer5,6,
Antiño R. Allen5,6,7, April E. Ronca2,8, Marianne B. Sowa2, Ruth K. Globus2 and Candice G. T. Tahimic
2,3,9✉
Isolation on Earth can alter physiology and signaling of organs systems, including the central nervous system. Although not in
complete solitude, astronauts operate in an isolated environment during spaceﬂight. In this study, we determined the effects of
isolation and simulated microgravity solely or combined, on the inﬂammatory cytokine milieu of the hippocampus. Adult female
wild-type mice underwent simulated microgravity by hindlimb unloading for 30 days in single or social (paired) housing. In
hippocampus, simulated microgravity and isolation each regulate a discrete repertoire of cytokines associated with inﬂammation.
Their combined effects are not additive. A model for mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) quenching via targeted
overexpression of the human catalase gene to the mitochondria (MCAT mice), are protected from isolation- and/or simulated
microgravity-induced changes in cytokine expression. These ﬁndings suggest a key role for mitochondrial ROS signaling in
neuroinﬂammatory responses to spaceﬂight and prolonged bedrest, isolation, and conﬁnement on Earth.
npj Microgravity  (2021) 7:24 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00152-w
INTRODUCTION
Isolation is an important feature of the spaceﬂight environment.
Interplanetary missions (e.g., trip to Mars) will involve mission crew
operating in isolated environments for prolonged periods of time.
On Earth, isolation has profound effects on the central nervous
system (CNS) including behavioral changes, upregulated oxidative
stress pathways, neuroinﬂammatory responses, as well as brain
cytokine alterations1–3. In addition, isolation worsens aging-related
cognitive impairments and immune deﬁcits4.
Spaceﬂight also can lead to immune dysfunction as well as
reactivation of latent viruses5–8. International Space Station (ISS)
crew members on a 6-month spaceﬂight mission had diminished
T/NK cell function9 and increased inﬂammatory plasma cytokine
levels10. In shorter duration missions (9–14 days), changes in the
distribution and function of peripheral leukocytes were also
detected in astronauts11. Further, the subset of astronauts who
experienced viral shedding also displayed increased plasma
cytokine protein levels in their plasma during ﬂight12, linking
dysregulated cytokine levels with impaired immune function.
We showed previously that isolation in combination with
simulated microgravity by hindlimb unloading (HU) led to a
reduction in the percentage of circulating CD4+ immune cells,
which was not observed in social housed HU animals13. This
ﬁnding suggests that isolation can modify immune responses to
simulated spaceﬂight and that the combination of these two
spaceﬂight stressors can lead to discrete immune deﬁcits.
However, the combined effects of isolation and microgravity on
neuroimmune outcomes are not deﬁned. Excess production of
free radicals (e.g., reactive oxygen species, ROS) have been linked
to
neuroinﬂammation14.
Yet
there
have
been
few
studies
exploring oxidative damage as a mechanism by which space
environmental factors, singly or in combination, mediate aspects
of CNS immune responses. To address these gaps in knowledge,
HU was conducted on paired (social) and single housed wild-type
and
MCAT
mice,
a
genetic
model
for
mitochondrial
ROS
quenching. MCAT mice overexpress the human catalase gene
targeted to the mitochondria15, a major site of cellular ROS
production. MCAT mice display decreased oxidative damage and
H2O2 production.
The MCAT transgenic model15 was developed to enable testing
various aspects of the free radical theory of aging16, which posits
that cells, tissues, and organisms age due to an accumulation of
oxidative damage via excess production of ROS. Overexpression
of catalase when targeted speciﬁcally to the mitochondria, but
not when targeted to the nucleus or cytoplasm, prolongs murine
lifespan and reduces age-related cardiovascular17–19 and cogni-
tive deﬁcits20 sharing features with known or anticipated effects
of spaceﬂight21–25. Findings from human astronauts long ago led
to the proposal that spaceﬂight and advancing age share
physiological consequences26, leading us to question if they also
share molecular mechanisms. Therefore, we determined whether
the MCAT transgene also is protective using a ground-based
model that simulates important aspects of spaceﬂight, micro-
gravity, and isolation.
MCAT mice show increased median and maximum lifespans
(5 months, and 5.5 months, respectively)15 and are protected
from a number of aging-associated pathologies. For example,
MCAT mice display protection from cardiovascular deﬁcits17–19
and Alzheimer’s disease-related amyloid deposition27. Further,
the brains of MCAT mice indicate the rescue of simulated space
1Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, MD, USA. 2Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 3KBR, Houston, TX, USA.
4Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA 98154, USA. 5Division of Radiation Health, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
6Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. 7Neurobiology and Developmental Sciences, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. 8Wake Forest Medical School, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. 9Department of Biology, University of North Florida, Jacksonville,
FL, USA. ✉email: c.tahimic@unf.edu
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

radiation-induced decrements in neurogenesis28 and neuronal
spine
morphology29.
The
overexpression
of
catalase
also
quenches mitochondrial oxidative stress in macrophages30,
suggesting that catalase can impact oxidative signaling in
inﬂammatory cells. MCAT mice also exhibit enhanced hippo-
campal spatial learning, memory, and reduced contextual fear
conditioning15,20.
Altered cognitive function is thought to be one of the risks
associated with long-duration spaceﬂight31. The production of
ROS, pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, chemokines, and neurotrophic
factors are involved in hippocampal neuropathy. Prolonged
exposure to simulated microgravity by HU is associated with
increased hippocampal oxidative stress biomarkers, which may
increase injury32. Proteomic analysis of the hippocampus in HU
mice reveals changes in structural proteins coupled with the loss
of proteins involved in cell metabolism33. In addition, microgravity
leads to hippocampal-dependent learning and memory impair-
ment in animals34.
Cytokines are important mediators of both innate and adaptive
immunity. They are produced by resident immune cells in the
CNS, peripheral tissues, and in circulation35,36. There is emerging
evidence that cytokines contribute to the detrimental effects of
isolation
triggered
by
disease
or
injury37,38.
For
example,
hippocampal expression of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) is signiﬁ-
cantly increased 24 h after ischemia in isolated mice compared to
untreated controls, but not in pair-housed mice37,38. In humans as
well as animals, both spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity
(bedrest) can lead to changes in cytokine expression10,12,39–42.
Therefore, in this study, we tested the hypothesis that isolation
and
simulated
microgravity
lead
to
altered
hippocampal
cytokine expression via mitochondrial ROS-related mechanisms.
Hippocampal alterations, e.g., oxidative damage, spatial changes,
and genetic alterations have been reported in both actual and
modeled microgravity32,43–46 and linked to behavioral deﬁcits47.
These higher CNS functions are critical for astronaut perfor-
mance during extended periods of spaceﬂight. Therefore, the
hippocampus was selected as the focus of the current study. We
found that quenching mitochondrial ROS mitigated the effects of
both simulated microgravity and isolation in the hippocampus.
Thus, these ﬁndings highlight the importance of mitochondrial
ROS mechanisms in CNS responses to these stressors, thereby
providing a rationale for testing possible use of antioxidants to
mitigate CNS risks associated with long-term space exploration
as well as bedrest and isolation on Earth.
RESULTS
Effects of isolation, microgravity and their combination on
hippocampal cytokine levels
We performed unbiased hierarchical clustering of cytokine
protein expression to gain insight into the impacts of our main
experimental variables, loading state (NL: normally loaded or
HU), housing environment (single or social housing), and
genotype (WT: wild type or MCAT) on the overall cytokine
milieu in the hippocampus (Fig. 1). At the highest hierarchical
level, samples generally clustered by housing conditions (single
or social). Samples within the single housed cluster, formed sub-
clusters mostly based on genotype (WT or MCAT), which was not
observed in the social housed cluster. Loading state (NL or HU)
did not appear to contribute to observed clustering of cytokine
expression.
We ﬁrst examined the effects of housing environment in all
groups (Fig. 2). A comparison between single and social housed
mice revealed marked effects of isolation in the hippocampus.
Eleven out of 44 cytokines were elevated in wild-type, single
housed mice versus the social-housed group (Fig. 2a and
Supplementary Table 3). These effects were mitigated in MCAT
mice. IL-6 (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Table 3) is provided as a
representative
example
of
the
expression
pattern
evident
amongst these 11 cytokines.
Next, we focused on the effects of simulated microgravity and
genotype (as main factors and their interactions) on hippocampal
Fig. 1
Heatmap showing expression of a panel of 44 cytokines in hippocampus and hierarchical clustering analysis of eight experimental
groups. Except for a few samples, clustering generally occurred by housing environment (single or social). Deeper shades of red: higher
cytokine levels, deeper shades of blue: lower cytokine levels, off-white: no change in expression.
L. Rubinstein et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

cytokine expression in single housed mice (Fig. 3 and Supple-
mentary Table 4). When exploring the effect of genotype (main
factor) in single housed mice, we found differences in cytokine
expression (Fig. 3a), with 13 out of 44 cytokines showing reduced
protein levels in single housed MCAT versus wild-type mice
(Supplementary Table 5). HU downregulated IL-13 in WT mice.
Interestingly, IL-13 levels were lower in MCAT NL mice than in WT
NL mice. HU did not appear to cause any further decreases in IL-13
levels of MCAT animals, suggesting mitigation of cytokine changes
(Fig. 3b and Supplementary Table 4).
In social housed animals, simulated microgravity and transgene
expression caused changes in the expression of ﬁve hippocampal
cytokines (Fig. 4a). Four out of these ﬁve cytokines (IL-3, IL-1β, IL-10,
and IL-17) were upregulated in HU versus NL mice, and mitigated in
MCAT mice (Supplementary Table 6). Results for IL-3 are shown as a
representative example of the upregulated cytokines (Fig. 4b). In
contrast, (IL-12) was downregulated and this effect also was
mitigated in MCAT animals (Supplementary Table 6). Some of the
cytokines showed relatively low expression levels (e.g., IL-6, IL-1β,
refer to Supplementary Table 1 for full list of cytokines) relative to
other cytokines in the panel. These results are consistent with
values reported in other studies that suggest biologically relevant
effects at these levels of expression48,49. Table 1 summarizes the
results of cytokine analysis of hippocampus.
Effects of isolation, microgravity, and their combination on
plasma cytokine levels
The same 44-cytokine protein expression analysis was performed
on blood plasma to assess possible system-wide effects of
simulated microgravity and isolation. Cytokine expression patterns
in the plasma differed markedly from those observed in the
hippocampus. Figure 5a shows the effects of simulated micro-
gravity and genotype on cytokine plasma expression in single
housed mice. In single housed mice, HU upregulated expression of
IL-20 and IFN-β1, whereas these effects were not observed in
MCAT mice (Supplementary Table 7). In contrast, HU down-
regulated MDC (macrophage-derived chemokine), which also was
mitigated in MCAT mice (Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 7).
Fractalkine showed a genotype effect (Supplementary Table 8).
In social housed groups (excluding isolation as a factor),
there was a twofold increase in IL-20 protein levels in the
plasma of HU mice compared to NL controls. This effect was
mitigated in MCAT mice (Fig. 6 and Supplementary Table 9).
Within the 44 cytokines tested, isolation showed less impact
on plasma cytokine expression levels than observed in the
hippocampus.
Isolation affected only two cytokines in plasma—Eotaxin and
MDC (Fig. 7). These cytokines were upregulated in single housed
Fig. 3
Effect of combined isolation and simulated microgravity and the impact of MCAT genotype on hippocampal cytokine expression
(single housed groups only). a Diagram showing the effects of simulated microgravity and genotype on hippocampal cytokine expression in
single housed animals. b IL-13 protein levels showing downregulation by HU and further decreased by MCAT genotype. WT NL (n = 3), WT HU
(n = 3), MCAT NL (n = 4), and MCAT HU (n = 4). Some data points overlap. *Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Tukey
post hoc test.
Fig. 2
Cytokines showing higher expression in hippocampus due to isolation and mitigation in MCAT mice. a Eleven out of 44 cytokines
were upregulated in wild-type single housed vs social-housed mice and mitigated in MCAT single housed mice. b Representative graph (IL-6)
of one of the 11 cytokines elevated due to isolation and mitigated in MCAT mice. Here and in succeeding dot plots, the longer horizontal line
in the dot plot corresponds to the group mean while the shorter horizontal lines depict the standard error (SE). Sample sizes are WT NL social
(n = 6), WT NL single (n = 3), MCAT NL social (n = 6), and MCAT NL single (n = 4). Some data points overlap. A ﬁt model was generated to
include housing state, genotype, loading state, and their pairwise interactions. Interaction effects between housing state and genotype were
assessed at p < 0.05. *Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 by Tukey post hoc test.
L. Rubinstein et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 

animals and unchanged in MCAT mice (Supplementary Table 10).
Refer to Table 1 for a summary of results from plasma cytokine
analysis.
Assessment of corticosterone levels in plasma
To
begin
investigating
possible
underlying
stress-related
mechanisms, we measured plasma corticosterone levels in all
groups (Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 11).
Corticosterone levels were generally higher in the social groups
compared to their corresponding single housed groups (only WT
single vs WT social housed HU groups showed no differences).
We previously reported that HU of wild-type animals led to
increased corticosterone levels13. In the current study, we found
that single housed MCAT mice were protected from HU-induced
increases in corticosterone levels. Interestingly, social housed
MCAT NL mice had higher corticosterone levels versus social
housed WT NL mice. However, HU in social housed MCAT mice
did not lead to additional increases in corticosterone levels
relative to the social MCAT NL group. Refer to Table 1 for a
summary of corticosterone results.
Measurements of oxidative damage in hippocampus
Changes in inﬂammatory status have been linked to differences in
oxidative damage50,51. To determine whether isolation or simu-
lated microgravity caused oxidative damage in the hippocampus,
we measured 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) adduct levels. Single
housed WT animals generally showed higher levels of 4-HNE
compared to social housed WT mice (Supplementary Fig. 3A, and
Supplementary Table 12). In contrast, 4-HNE levels of single versus
social housed MCAT groups were generally comparable. Further,
no HU effect was observed (Supplementary Table 13).
DISCUSSION
Although not in complete solitude, human crew in deep space
missions will experience prolonged exposure to environments
isolated from Earth and larger social groups. Using a rodent
model, we assessed the consequence of isolation alone or in
combination with simulated microgravity on the CNS cytokine
milieu, a key component of the neuroimmune response. In
addition, we sought to determine whether mitochondrial ROS
signaling contributed to cytokine responses in the CNS focusing
Table 1.
Summary of the response of each genotype to isolation, simulated microgravity, or both.
Genotype Treatment
Hippocampus
Plasma
Wild type
Isolation
Upregulation of 11 cytokines (IL-6, IFN-γ, IL-4, IL-9, IL-
13, LIF, MCP-1, M-CSF, TNF-α, MIG, G-CSF); Fig. 2
Upregulation of two cytokines (Eotaxin, MDC); Fig. 7
Downregulation of corticosterone levelsa
MCAT
Isolation
Mitigation of cytokine changes; Fig. 2
No mitigation of cytokine changes; Fig. 7
No change in corticosterone levels
Wild type
Simulated microgravity
Upregulation of four (IL-3, IL-1β, IL-10, IL-17) and
downregulation of one cytokine(s) (IL-12); Fig. 4
Upregulation of one cytokine (IL−20); Fig. 6
Upregulation of corticosterone levels
MCAT
Simulated microgravity
Mitigation of cytokine changes; Fig. 4
Mitigation of cytokine changes; Fig. 6
Mitigation of corticosterone changes
Wild type
Isolation + Simulated
microgravity
Downregulation of one cytokine (IL-13); Fig. 3
Upregulation of two (IL−20, IFN-β1) and
downregulation of one cytokine(s) (MDC); Fig. 5
Upregulation of corticosterone levels
MCAT
Isolation + Simulated
microgravity
Mitigation of cytokine change; Fig. 3
Mitigation of cytokine changes; Fig. 5
Mitigation of corticosterone changes
The main ﬁgure numbers corresponding to the summarized cytokine results are also included in the table. “Mitigation of cytokine change(s)” (by MCAT)
pertains to mitigation of all the cytokine changes observed in the corresponding wild-type group.
aOnly in NL groups; Corticosterone levels in HU groups are not further reduced by isolation.
Fig. 4
Effects of simulated microgravity (without isolation) and genotype on the expression of hippocampal cytokines (social housed
groups only). a Five hippocampal cytokines were differentially expressed in social housed HU versus NL mice and changes mitigated in MCAT
mice. Cytokine in italics (IL-12) was downregulated while the rest were upregulated. b Representative graph showing upregulated
hippocampal cytokine in social housed HU vs NL mice and mitigation in MCAT mice. Sample size is n = 6/group. Some data points overlap.
*Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test.
L. Rubinstein et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

on the hippocampus. Spaceﬂight is known to cause dysfunction
in a variety of tissues52–57. Various regions of the CNS are
negatively impacted by microgravity and its simulations. For
example, 14 days of HU increased acetylcholine activity in both
hippocampus and cortex, which was linked to inferior behavior
performances47,58. Our results suggest that isolation is an
important stimulus that can evoke changes in the cytokine
milieu of the hippocampus, with 11 of 44 immune-modulating
cytokines tested showing increased protein expression due to
isolation. We also found that compared to social housed mice,
isolation increased 4-HNE, an indicator of oxidative damage.
Together, these ﬁndings indicate that isolation can alter aspects
Fig. 6
Effect of simulated microgravity (without isolation) and genotype on the expression of plasma cytokines (social housed groups
only). a One cytokine, IL-20, was elevated due to HU in plasma of social housed mice and this effect is mitigated in MCAT animals. b Graph
showing protein expression of IL-20 in plasma of WT and MCAT animals exposed to HU. Sample size is n = 6/group. Some data points overlap.
*Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test.
Fig. 7
Effect of isolation on plasma cytokines. a Isolation elevates the levels of Eotaxin and MDC in plasma and are not mitigated in MCAT
mice. b Representative graph (Eotaxin) showing the effects of isolation on plasma cytokines and no mitigation in MCAT mice. WT NL social
(n = 6), WT NL single (n = 6), MCAT NL social (n = 7), and MCAT NL single (n = 6). Some data points overlap. A ﬁt model was created and
included housing state, genotype and loading state, and their pairwise interactions. Interaction effects between housing state and genotype
were assessed at p < 0.05.
Fig. 5
Effects of combined isolation and simulated microgravity and the impact of MCAT genotype on plasma cytokine expression
(single housed groups only). a Diagram showing the effect of simulated microgravity and genotype on plasma cytokine expression in single
housed animals. Three cytokines were differentially expressed in plasma of single housed HU versus NL mice and mitigated in MCAT HU mice.
MDC was downregulated (italics) while IL-20 and IFN-β1 were upregulated. b Representative graph showing IFN-β1, one of the two cytokines
elevated by HU and mitigated in MCAT mice. NL WT (n = 6), HU WT (n = 5), NL MCAT (n = 6), and U MCAT (n = 6). Some data points overlap.
*Statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0.05 by two-way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test.
L. Rubinstein et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 

of CNS immune signaling and lead to increased oxidative
damage in the CNS.
Changes in cytokine signaling in the CNS have been linked to
neuroinﬂammation, neurocognitive decline, reduced ability to
recover from brain injuries as well as neuroprotective effects. For
example, genetic deletion of IL-6 leads to reduced exploratory
behavior and decreased anxiety59. Deletion of IL-2 in mice leads
to cognitive deﬁcits that resemble aspects of Alzheimer’s
disease60 while disruption of Toll-like receptor signaling by
knockout of TLR4 protects against age-related cognitive decline
due to neuroinﬂammation and apoptosis61. Taken together,
ﬁndings from our study and others suggest that isolation poses a
risk to CNS health.
Isolation and HU led to discrete sets of differentially expressed
cytokines in hippocampus, suggesting different immunoregula-
tory mechanisms invoked by each of these stressors. Collectively,
the cytokines differentially expressed in response to HU or
isolation as single factors are known to play roles in immune
regulation, inﬂammatory disease and also are impacted by
spaceﬂight. (Refer to ref. 62 for a recent review on the functions
of interleukins and other cytokines). For example, circulating IL-20
protein levels (elevated by HU in our current study) are also
increased at the early
stages of rheumatoid
arthritis and
decreased after 6 months of treatment63,64. Further, IL-3 protein
levels are greater in splenocytes and thymocytes from space-ﬂown
rats than ground controls65. In peripheral blood mononuclear cells
obtained from astronauts onboard the ISS, IL-10 is reduced
following lipopolysaccharide stimulation compared to controls7.
Thus, our observations that simulated weightlessness and isola-
tion provoke expression of discrete cytokine repertoires is
consistent with our previous ﬁndings on immune cell responses
using these models13.
At the timepoint examined in this study, isolation had a more
pronounced impact than HU on the expression of cytokines in the
hippocampus, as indicated by differential expression of 11
cytokines as a result of isolation (single housed compared to
social housed NL groups) versus 5 cytokines due to HU (social
housed HU compared to NL groups). In addition, HU under single
and
social
housed
conditions
resulted
in
distinct
sets
of
differentially expressed cytokines in the hippocampus. Taken
together, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that simulated
weightlessness and isolation activate discrete molecular and
physiological mechanisms to regulate cytokine production.
We found that cytokine responses to spaceﬂight stressors in the
hippocampus versus circulation were also discrete under the
experimental conditions used in this study. Further, isolation-
induced cytokine responses were more extensive in the hippo-
campus compared to the plasma, based on the higher number of
cytokines affected (11 and 3, respectively). Although only a single
timepoint (30 days) was assessed in this study, our ﬁndings raise
the possibility that changes in cytokine levels in the circulation
may not mirror those in the brain during spaceﬂight. The 30 day
HU period is considered a chronic exposure paradigm given that it
accounts for 4% of an animal’s lifespan (assuming a 2 year
lifespan). For perspective, a trip to Mars can take about two years,
corresponding to 2.5% of a human lifespan (assuming 80 years as
the average human lifespan).
Our study is the ﬁrst to implicate mitochondrial ROS in the CNS
and in circulating cytokine levels brought about by combined
isolation and simulated microgravity. MCAT mice exhibited
protection from the hippocampal cytokine changes caused by
isolation, simulated microgravity, and in combination. In plasma,
HU-induced changes in cytokine expression were mitigated in
MCAT mice. In the hippocampus of single housed MCAT mice,
both IL-6 and TNFα show reduced expression relative to housing
matched wild-type controls. Both of these cytokines are known to
play
a
role
in
inﬂammation
(chronic
and
acute)
and
in
autoimmunity. In the same mice cohort we also found that HU
elevated circulating neutrophils and neutrophil to lymphocyte
ratio (NLR), suggesting increased inﬂammation while this effect
was mitigated in MCAT mice66. Taken together, our ﬁndings are
consistent with our hypothesis, highlighting the important role of
ROS in modulating systemic and neuroimmune responses to
simulated spaceﬂight.
Our study contributes new information on the regulation of
cytokine expression in the hippocampus in MCAT mice, a widely
used genetic model for quenching mitochondrial ROS and
studying diseases related to aging. MCAT mice have increased
mean and maximum lifespan15, enhanced hippocampal spatial
learning and memory, reduced contextual fear conditioning,
delayed lung cancer onset67, and delayed age-related cardiac
and ocular pathologies15. Some of the downregulated cytokines
we observed in MCAT mice contribute to the cancer microenvir-
onment (e.g., IL-6, INFγ, M-CSF, TNFα)67 and other metabolic
diseases.
For
example,
MCP-1
and
IL-6
contribute
to
the
development of abnormal glucose and lipid metabolism68–70.
Future
studies
could
be
conducted
to
test
ROS-mediated
modulation of the cytokine milieu as a potential mechanism for
the resistance of MCAT mice to the abovementioned aging-
related pathologies. In addition, our ﬁndings and those of others
provide a rationale for future investigations on ROS quenching as
a potential approach to mitigate inﬂammaging, the chronic low-
grade inﬂammation associated with aging21.
As we have reported previously, HU increased circulating
corticosterone levels of WT mice after 30 days regardless of
housing environment13. This effect was mitigated in MCAT single
housed mice. In social housed NL animals, corticosterone levels
were generally higher compared to the corresponding single
housed group. The underlying basis for the higher corticosterone
levels in these social housed mice versus single housed mice is
unclear. Social hierarchy may exist between pair-housed female
mice71, which may elevate the average corticosterone levels in
paired housing versus single housing conditions. The social
MCAT NL and HU groups had comparable corticosterone levels.
HU in social housed MCAT mice did not lead to further increases
in corticosterone levels possibly due to maximum upregulation
of the HPA axis and/or a protective effect by the MCAT genotype.
Interestingly,
increased
plasma
corticosterone
levels
were
observed in social housed mice even as plasma levels of an
oxidative damage marker (4-HNE) and a subset of inﬂammatory
cytokine protein levels in the hippocampus generally decreased.
This suggests that elevated stress-associated hormones need not
always coincide with pro-inﬂammatory and pro-oxidative states.
This also raises the possibility that the increase in corticosterone
levels in social housed groups is not a pathological response. The
underlying mechanisms for the inverse relationship of corticos-
terone with both oxidative damage and inﬂammatory cytokines
require further study.
Female
mice
were
selected
for
this
study.
Sex-speciﬁc
differences in rodent responses to isolation can occur72,73. In
humans, males and females show some differences in their
responses to conﬁnement74 and bedrest, another microgravity
analog75,76. Therefore, future investigations are needed to assess
the sex-dependent effects of isolation and microgravity as well as
any possible differences in oxidative stress responses. In summary,
isolation and long-term simulated microgravity via HU altered
cytokine expression levels in both the hippocampus and plasma.
These effects in the brain were mitigated in MCAT mice,
implicating an important role for mitochondrial ROS in aspects
of the neuroimmune response to microgravity and isolation.
Taken together, our ﬁndings and those of others provide a
rationale for the use of antioxidant-based approaches to address
anticipated CNS changes during spaceﬂight and in situations of
isolation and reduced mobility on Earth.
L. Rubinstein et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals and strains
Female wild-type C57BL/6NJ and MCAT transgenic mice were included
in this study. MCAT mice overexpress human catalase localized to the
mitochondria15. Wild type (WT) and MCAT mice for use in the
experiments were generated at NASA Ames Research Center (ARC) by
crossing male MCAT mice, B6.Cg-Tg (CAG-OTC/CAT) 4033Prab/J with
female C57BL/6NJ mice (from Jackson Laboratory; stocks 016197 and
005304, respectively). Genotyping was performed using the Red’N Amp
PCR kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Millipore-Sigma). All
animal procedures were performed in compliance with protocols
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at ARC.
The approved animal protocols associated with this study are NAS-16-
006 and NAS-16-007.
Hindlimb unloading
Sixteen-week-old female wild-type C57BL/6NJ and MCAT mice on C57BL/
6NJ background were assigned to one of eight experimental groups, and
housed either individually (single housed) or in pairs (social housed)
(Supplementary Fig. 1). Females were selected for this study in part
because the majority of rodent studies to date on simulated and actual
weightlessness have used females. The wild-type groups in this study were
the same animals used in our previous report which focused on the
assessment of musculoskeletal outcomes and ﬂow cytometry-based
immune cell proﬁling in response to isolation13. The traditional NASA
Ames HU cage system was used for single housed HU animals77, while
normally loaded (NL) single housed controls were maintained single
housed in standard vivarium cages. A separate validation experiment
conﬁrmed that NL mice housed in standard vivarium cages or in HU cages
did not differ in body weights, plasma corticosterone levels, soleus mass,
bone structure, and immune cell populations in peripheral blood (data not
shown). A custom caging system as we had previously described13, was
used for social housed, HU mice (pairs). Social housed, NL controls were
maintained in standard vivarium cages in pairs as controls for the social HU
mice. Animals assigned to HU groups were acclimated for 3 days in HU
cages but without unloading, prior to the onset of HU. Room temperature
was maintained at a range of 23–24 °C with a 12-h light: 12-h dark cycle.
Food and water were provided ad libitum. Nestlests (Ancare) were
provided as enrichment for the animals. Animal weights and food
consumption were monitored throughout the duration of the experiment.
Animals were euthanized 30 days after the onset of HU via CO2 inhalation
followed by cervical dislocation.
Sample collection and analysis
HU was initiated across three consecutive days with equal numbers of
wild-type and MCAT mice (similar ages) on any given day to accommodate
the large number of animals in this study. All experimental groups
experienced the same length of treatments (e.g., HU). Consequently,
dissections were performed across 3 consecutive days.
The left brain hemisphere was ﬂash frozen and a tissue biopsy (1.20 mm
Harris micro punch) from the hippocampus was performed inside a
cryotome chamber set at −20 °C to avoid thawing. Hippocampal tissue
was then homogenized in mild lysis buffer (Tris 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM,
Igepal 1%), Protease Inhibitors (Millipore-Sigma)78. Samples were then
centrifuged at 4 °C at 1000 × g for 10 min and supernatants aliquoted and
frozen at −80 °C until analysis.
Cytokine protein abundance in hippocampal homogenates were
analyzed using a Mouse Cytokine/Chemokine Array 44-Plex-MD44 (EVE
Technologies), and concentration standards run for each cytokine. IL-3
cytokine expression was validated by ELISA (Abcam, Cat# ab113345-IL-3).
Hippocampal cytokine levels were normalized to total protein content as
determined by BCA assay.
Blood was collected from the vena cava immediately after euthanasia.
Undiluted plasma was analyzed for cytokine protein abundance as
employed for hippocampal homogenates.
Statistical analysis for cytokine analysis
Statistical analysis of cytokine expression was performed using JMP
(SAS), Version 14.0.0. Equal variance was ﬁrst evaluated by Levene’s test
and normality assessed by Shapiro–Wilk goodness of ﬁt test. If equal
variance and normality were met, a ﬁt model was performed taking into
account the three main effects: loading state (NL or HU), housing (single
or social), and genotype (WT or MCAT) and comparisons between the
main effects done two at a time (two-way ANOVA) (Supplementary
Fig. 1). A two-way ANOVA was selected since we were interested in
understanding how one factor interacted with one other factor. The
threshold of statistical signiﬁcance for both main factor and interaction
effects was set at p < 0.05. If interaction effects were evident, a Tukey
post hoc test was performed at p < 0.05. If a main effect was evident, a
Dunnett’s test was applied to determine differences between groups of
that main effect. A two-way ANOVA also was conducted to evaluate the
effects of loading state (NL or HU), genotype (WT or MCAT), and loading
state × genotype on the four single housed groups (Supplementary Fig.
1). Similarly, a two-way ANOVA was performed on the four social housed
groups (Supplementary Fig. 1). For datasets with unequal variance and/
or non-normal distributions, a non-parametric Wilcoxon all pairs test was
performed
with
statistical
signiﬁcance
set
at
p < 0.05.
Refer
to
Supplementary Tables 1–13 for more info on p values and summary of
the statistical testing applied in this study.
Depiction of cytokine results: Venn diagrams
On the basis of results derived from two-way ANOVA, statistically
signiﬁcant differences in cytokine abundance were summarized in Venn
diagrams. As described speciﬁcally in each ﬁgure and legend, each circle in
the diagram represents groups combined according to the various main
factors, i.e., loading state (NL or HU, described as Simulated Microgravity
effects), or housing (single or social, described as Isolation effects), or
genotype (WT or MCAT, described as Genotype effects), with speciﬁc
cytokines affected by the factors listed within each circle. The intersect of
two circles depicts which cytokines were affected by both main factors. A
crossbar abutting the intersect of the circles depicts ﬁndings that
differences in cytokine levels common to both main factors were mitigated
in MCAT mice relative to WT mice.
Assays for oxidative damage
Hippocampal homogenates were analyzed for ROS and related products.
4-Hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) adduct was measured by OxiSelect HNE Adduct
Competitive ELISA (Cell Biolabs, Cat# STA-838).
Assay for plasma corticosterone
Plasma corticosterone was analyzed in 1:100 diluted plasma by ELISA
(Abcam, Cat# ab108821).
Statistical analysis for corticosterone and assays for oxidative
damage
Statistical analysis as performed using JMP (SAS), Version 14.0.0. Equal
variance was ﬁrst evaluated by Levene’s test and normality assessed by
Shapiro–Wilk goodness of ﬁt test. For 4-HNE results, a linear ﬁt model was
created using a least squares approach, and involved the three main
variables (loading, housing environment, genotype) and their pairwise
interactions (2 × 2 × 2 analysis of variance, ANOVA). If interaction effects
were observed (p < 0.05), a Tukey post hoc test was performed. For
corticosterone results, a non-parametric Wilcoxon all pairs test was
performed with statistical signiﬁcance set at p < 0.05.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
DATA AVAILABILITY
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article
and its supplementary information ﬁles.
Received: 23 January 2021; Accepted: 11 June 2021;
REFERENCES
1. Serra, M., Pisu, M. G., Floris, I. & Biggio, G. Social isolation-induced changes in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in the rat. Stress 8, 259–264 (2005).
L. Rubinstein et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 

2. Jiang, Z., Rompala, G. R., Zhang, S., Cowell, R. M. & Nakazawa, K. Social isolation
exacerbates schizophrenia-like phenotypes via oxidative stress in cortical inter-
neurons. Biol. Psychiatry 73, 1024–1034 (2013).
3. Audet, M. C., McQuaid, R. J., Merali, Z. & Anisman, H. Cytokine variations and
mood disorders: inﬂuence of social stressors and social support. Front. Neurosci. 8,
416 (2014).
4. Arranz, L., Gimenez-Llort, L., De Castro, N. M., Baeza, I. & De la Fuente, M. [Social
isolation during old age worsens cognitive, behavioral and immune impairment].
Rev. espanola de. Geriatr. y. gerontologia 44, 137–142 (2009).
5. Crucian, B. E. et al. Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight: potential
countermeasures for deep space exploration missions. Front. Immunol. 9, 1437
(2018).
6. Mehta, S. K. et al. Multiple latent viruses reactivate in astronauts during Space
Shuttle missions. Brain Behav. Immun. 41, 210–217 (2014).
7. Crucian, B. et al. Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration
spaceﬂight. npj Microgravity 1, 15013 (2015).
8. Mehta, S. K. et al. Latent virus reactivation in astronauts on the international
space station. npj Microgravity 3, 11 (2017).
9. Bigley, A. B. et al. NK cell function is impaired during long-duration spaceﬂight. J.
Appl Physiol. 126, 842–853 (2019).
10. Crucian, B. E. et al. Plasma cytokine concentrations indicate that in vivo hormonal
regulation of immunity is altered during long-duration spaceﬂight. J. Interferon
Cytokine Res. 34, 778–786 (2014).
11. Crucian, B. et al. Immune system dysregulation occurs during short duration
spaceﬂight on board the space shuttle. J. Clin. Immunol. 33, 456–465 (2013).
12. Mehta, S. K. et al. Reactivation of latent viruses is associated with increased
plasma cytokines in astronauts. Cytokine 61, 205–209 (2013).
13. Tahimic, C. G. T. et al. Inﬂuence of social isolation during prolonged simulated
weightlessness by hindlimb unloading. Front. Physiol. 10, 1147 (2019).
14. Uttara, B., Singh, A. V., Zamboni, P. & Mahajan, R. T. Oxidative stress and neu-
rodegenerative diseases: a review of upstream and downstream antioxidant
therapeutic options. Curr. Neuropharmacol. 7, 65–74 (2009).
15. Schriner, S. E. et al. Extension of murine life span by overexpression of catalase
targeted to mitochondria. Science 308, 1909–1911 (2005).
16. Harman, D. Aging: a theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry. J.
Gerontol. 11, 298–300 (1956).
17. Dai, D. F. et al. Overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria attenuates
murine cardiac aging. Circulation 119, 2789–2797 (2009).
18. Dai, D. F. et al. Age-dependent cardiomyopathy in mitochondrial mutator mice is
attenuated by overexpression of catalase targeted to mitochondria. Aging Cell 9,
536–544 (2010).
19. Dai, D. F. & Rabinovitch, P. Mitochondrial oxidative stress mediates induction of
autophagy and hypertrophy in angiotensin-II treated mouse hearts. Autophagy 7,
917–918 (2011).
20. Olsen, R. H., Johnson, L. A., Zuloaga, D. G., Limoli, C. L. & Raber, J. Enhanced
hippocampus-dependent memory and reduced anxiety in mice over-expressing
human catalase in mitochondria. J. Neurochem. 125, 303–313 (2013).
21. Franceschi, C. & Campisi, J. Chronic inﬂammation (inﬂammaging) and its
potential contribution to age-associated diseases. J. Gerontol. Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 69, S4–S9 (2014).
22. Lee, J. K. et al. Spaceﬂight-associated brain white matter microstructural changes
and intracranial ﬂuid redistribution. JAMA Neurol. 76, 412–419 (2019).
23. Silver, F. H., DeVore, D. & Siperko, L. M. Invited review: role of mechanophysiology
in aging of ECM: effects of changes in mechanochemical transduction. J. Appl.
Physiol. 95, 2134–2141 (2003).
24. Convertino, V. A. Mechanisms of microgravity induced orthostatic intolerance:
implications for effective countermeasures. J. Gravitational Physiol. 9, 1–13 (2002).
25. Steffen, J. M., Fell, R. D., Geoghegan, T. E., Ringel, L. C. & Musacchia, X. J. Age
effects on rat hindlimb muscle atrophy during suspension unloading. J. Appl.
Physiol. 68, 927–931 (1990).
26. Vernikos, J. & Schneider, V. S. Space, gravity and the physiology of aging: parallel
or convergent disciplines? A mini-review. Gerontology 56, 157–166 (2010).
27. Mao, P. et al. Mitochondria-targeted catalase reduces abnormal APP processing,
amyloid beta production and BACE1 in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease:
implications for neuroprotection and lifespan extension. Hum. Mol. Genet. 21,
2973–2990 (2012).
28. Liao, A. C. et al. Mitochondrial-targeted human catalase affords neuroprotection
from proton irradiation. Radiat. Res. 180, 1–6 (2013).
29. Parihar, V. K. et al. Targeted overexpression of mitochondrial catalase prevents
radiation-induced cognitive dysfunction. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 22, 78–91 (2015).
30. Wang, Y., Wang, G. Z., Rabinovitch, P. S. & Tabas, I. Macrophage mitochondrial
oxidative stress promotes atherosclerosis and nuclear factor-kappaB-mediated
inﬂammation in macrophages. Circulation Res. 114, 421–433 (2014).
31. Clement, G. R. et al. Challenges to the central nervous system during human
spaceﬂight missions to Mars. J. Neurophysiol. 123, 2037–2063 (2020).
32. Mao, X. W. et al. Simulated microgravity and low-dose/low-dose-rate radiation
induces oxidative damage in the mouse brain. Radiat. Res. 185, 647–657 (2016).
33. Sarkar, P. et al. Proteomic analysis of mice hippocampus in simulated micro-
gravity environment. J. Proteome Res. 5, 548–553 (2006).
34. Sun, X. Q., Xu, Z. P., Zhang, S., Cao, X. S. & Liu, T. S. Simulated weightlessness
aggravates hypergravity-induced impairment of learning and memory and
neuronal apoptosis in rats. Behav. Brain Res. 199, 197–202 (2009).
35. Merson, T. D., Binder, M. D. & Kilpatrick, T. J. Role of cytokines as mediators and
regulators of microglial activity in inﬂammatory demyelination of the CNS.
Neuromolecular Med. 12, 99–132 (2010).
36. Kothur, K., Wienholt, L., Brilot, F. & Dale, R. C. CSF cytokines/chemokines as bio-
markers in neuroinﬂammatory CNS disorders: a systematic review. Cytokine 77,
227–237 (2016).
37. Hennessy, M. B., Deak, T. & Schiml, P. A. Sociality and sickness: have cytokines
evolved to serve social functions beyond times of pathogen exposure? Brain
Behav. Immun. 37, 15–20 (2014).
38. Gaudier-Diaz, M. M. et al. Social interaction modulates the neuroinﬂammatory
response to global cerebral ischemia in male mice. Brain Res. 1673, 86–94 (2017).
39. Pecaut, M. J. et al. Is spaceﬂight-induced immune dysfunction linked to systemic
changes in metabolism? PLoS ONE 12, e0174174 (2017).
40. Jurdana, M. et al. Impact of 14-day bed rest on serum adipokines and low-grade
inﬂammation in younger and older adults. Age 37, 116 (2015).
41. Hoff, P. et al. Effects of 60-day bed rest with and without exercise on cellular and
humoral immunological parameters. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 12, 483–492 (2015).
42. Xu, X. et al. Changes of cytokines during a spaceﬂight analog-a 45-day head-
down bed rest. PLoS ONE 8, e77401 (2013).
43. Day, J. R., Frank, A. T., O’Callaghan, J. P. & DeHart, B. W. Effects of microgravity and
bone morphogenetic protein II on GFAP in rat brain. J. Appl Physiol. 85, 716–722
(1998).
44. Knierim, J. J., McNaughton, B. L. & Poe, G. R. Three-dimensional spatial selectivity
of hippocampal neurons during space ﬂight. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 209–210 (2000).
45. Ranjan, A., Behari, J. & Mallick, B. N. Cytomorphometric changes in hippocampal
CA1 neurons exposed to simulated microgravity using rats as model. Front.
Neurol. 5, 77 (2014).
46. Mao, X. W. et al. Spaceﬂight induces oxidative damage to blood-brain barrier
integrity in a mouse model. FASEB J. 34, 15516–15530 (2020).
47. Zhang, Y. et al. Involvement of cholinergic dysfunction and oxidative damage in
the effects of simulated weightlessness on learning and memory in rats. BioMed.
Res. Int. 2018, 2547532 (2018).
48. Erickson, M. A. & Banks, W. A. Cytokine and chemokine responses in serum
and brain after single and repeated injections of lipopolysaccharide: multi-
plex quantiﬁcation with path analysis. Brain Behav. Immun. 25, 1637–1648
(2011).
49. Leclercq, S. et al. Low-dose penicillin in early life induces long-term changes in
murine gut microbiota, brain cytokines and behavior. Nat. Commun. 8, 15062
(2017).
50. Garrido, A., Cruces, J., Ceprian, N., Vara, E. & de la Fuente, M. Oxidative-
inﬂammatory stress in immune cells from adult mice with premature aging.
International
Journal
of
Molecular
Sciences
20,
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms20030769 (2019).
51. Accattato, F. et al. Effects of acute physical exercise on oxidative stress and
inﬂammatory status in young, sedentary obese subjects. PLoS ONE 12, e0178900
(2017).
52. Norsk, P. Adaptation of the cardiovascular system to weightlessness: surprises,
paradoxes and implications for deep space missions. Acta Physiol. 228, e13434
(2020).
53. Vico, L. & Hargens, A. Skeletal changes during and after spaceﬂight. Nat. Rev.
Rheumatol. 14, 229–245 (2018).
54. Martin Paez, Y., Mudie, L. I. & Subramanian, P. S. Spaceﬂight associated neuro-
ocular syndrome (SANS): a systematic review and future directions. Eye Brain 12,
105–117 (2020).
55. Gao, Y., Arfat, Y., Wang, H. & Goswami, N. Muscle atrophy induced by mechanical
unloading: mechanisms and potential countermeasures. Front. Physiol. 9, 235
(2018).
56. Frantzidis, C. A. et al. Current trends and future perspectives of space neu-
roscience towards preparation for interplanetary missions. Neurol. India 67,
S182–S187 (2019).
57. Cucinotta, F. A. & Cacao, E. Risks of cognitive detriments after low dose heavy ion
and proton exposures. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 95, 985–998 (2019).
58. Mysoet, J. et al. Reorganization of motor cortex and impairment of motor per-
formance induced by hindlimb unloading are partially reversed by cortical IGF-1
administration. Behav Brain Res. 317, 434–443 (2017).
59. Sanchis, P. et al. Microglial cell-derived interleukin-6 inﬂuences behavior and
inﬂammatory response in the brain following traumatic brain injury. Glia 68,
999–1016 (2020).
L. Rubinstein et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

60. Alves, S. et al. Interleukin-2 improves amyloid pathology, synaptic failure and
memory in Alzheimer’s disease mice. Brain 140, 826–842 (2017).
61. Zhong, Q. et al. Toll-like receptor 4 deﬁciency ameliorates beta2-microglobulin
induced age-related cognition decline due to neuroinﬂammation in mice. Mol.
Brain 13, 20 (2020).
62. Akdis, M. et al. Interleukins (from IL-1 to IL-38), interferons, transforming growth
factor beta, and TNF-alpha: Receptors, functions, and roles in diseases. J. Allergy
Clin. Immunol. 138, 984–1010 (2016).
63. Kragstrup, T. W. et al. The interleukin-20 receptor axis in early rheumatoid
arthritis: novel links between disease-associated autoantibodies and radiographic
progression. Arthritis Res. Ther. 18, 61 (2016).
64. Autieri, M. V. IL-19 and other IL-20 family member cytokines in vascular inﬂam-
matory diseases. Front. Immunol. 9, 700 (2018).
65. Miller, E. S., Koebel, D. A. & Sonnenfeld, G. Inﬂuence of spaceﬂight on the pro-
duction of interleukin-3 and interleukin-6 by rat spleen and thymus cells. J. Appl
Physiol. 78, 810–813 (1995).
66. Paul, A. M. et al. Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio: a biomarker to monitor the
immune status of astronauts. Front. Immunol. 11, 564950 (2020).
67. Ge, X. et al. Mitochondrial catalase suppresses naturally occurring lung cancer in
old mice. Pathobiol. Aging Age Relat. Dis. 5, 28776 (2015).
68. Shi, J., Fan, J., Su, Q. & Yang, Z. Cytokines and abnormal glucose and lipid
metabolism. Front. Endocrinol. 10, 703 (2019).
69. Stouthard, J. M., Oude Elferink, R. P. & Sauerwein, H. P. Interleukin-6 enhances
glucose transport in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 220,
241–245 (1996).
70. Park, J. et al. MCP-1/CCR2 system is involved in high glucose-induced ﬁbronectin
and type IV collagen expression in cultured mesangial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Ren.
Physiol. 295, F749–F757 (2008).
71. Varholick, J. A. et al. Social dominance hierarchy type and rank contribute to
phenotypic variation within cages of laboratory mice. Sci. Rep. 9, 13650
(2019).
72. Matsuda, S., Tohyama, S. & Mizutani, A. Sex differences in the effects of adult
short-term isolation rearing on contextual fear memory and extinction. Neurosci.
Lett. 687, 119–123 (2018).
73. Ross, A. P. et al. Sex-dependent effects of social isolation on the regulation of
arginine-vasopressin (AVP) V1a, oxytocin (OT) and serotonin (5HT) 1a receptor
binding and aggression. Hormones Behav. 116, 104578 (2019).
74. Strewe, C. et al. Sex differences in stress and immune responses during con-
ﬁnement in Antarctica. Biol. Sex. Differences 10, 20 (2019).
75. Fortney, S. M., Turner, C., Steinmann, L., Driscoll, T. & Alfrey, C. Blood volume
responses of men and women to bed rest. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 34, 434–439
(1994).
76. Grenon, S. M. et al. Why is orthostatic tolerance lower in women than in men?
Renal and cardiovascular responses to simulated microgravity and the role of
midodrine. J. Investig. Med. 54, 180–190 (2006).
77. Morey-Holton, E. R. & Globus, R. K. Hindlimb unloading rodent model: technical
aspects. J. Appl Physiol. 92, 1367–1377 (2002).
78. Palkovits, M. Punch sampling biopsy technique. Methods Enzymol. 103, 368–376
(1983).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by a grant from the NASA Space Biology Program (R.K.G.,
C.G.T.T.). L.R. was supported by a fellowship from the NASA Postdoctoral Program
(NPP). We thank Dr. Masahiro Terada for assistance in the animal experiments and
dissections. We thank Drs. Sulekha Anand and Joshua Alwood for advice on statistical
methods.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.G.T.T., R.K.G., A.S., and L.R. conceived and planned the study. L.R., A.S., S.S., S.M.T.,
M.G.L, and C.G.T.T. conducted the experiments. L.R., A.S., S.S., S.M.T., M.G.L., C.G.T.T.,
F.K., A.R.A. collected and analyzed the data. L.R., C.G.T.T., A.R.A., M.B.S., and R.K.G.
interpreted the results. L.R. and C.G.T.T. drafted the manuscript. All authors approved
the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00152-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.G.T.T.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
L. Rubinstein et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2021)  24 
