iScience
Review
Recent transcriptomic studies to elucidate
the plant adaptive response to spaceﬂight
and to simulated space environments
Ara´nzazu Manzano,1,* Euge´ nie Carnero-Diaz,2 Rau´ l Herranz,1 and F. Javier Medina1,3,*
SUMMARY
Discovering the adaptation mechanisms of plants to the space environment is
essential for supporting human space exploration. Transcriptomic analyses allow
the identiﬁcation of adaptation response pathways by detecting changes in gene
expression at the global genome level caused by the main factors of the space
environment, namely altered gravity and cosmic radiation. This article reviews
transcriptomic studies carried out from plants grown in spaceﬂights and in
different ground-based microgravity simulators. Despite differences in plant
growth conditions, these studies have shown that cell wall remodeling, oxidative
stress, defense response, and photosynthesis are common altered processes in
plants grown under spaceﬂight conditions. European scientists have signiﬁcantly
contributed to the acquisition of this knowledge, e.g., by showing the role of red
light in the adaptation response of plants (EMCS experiments) and the mecha-
nisms of cellular response and adaptation mostly affecting cell cycle regulation,
using cell cultures in microgravity simulators.
INTRODUCTION
Space exploration is one of the most fascinating enterprises for humans. It is becoming increasingly evident
that plants are an essential companion of humans in space exploration as a privileged source of high quality
nutrients and oxygen as well as waste recycling systems, that is, as a key component of bioregenerative life
support systems (Fu et al., 2016). Thus, the search for the most efﬁcient way of cultivating plants in space,
including the knowledge of the mechanisms of adaptation of plants to the space environment and the care-
ful selection of plant species, varieties and genetic lines, are current major challenges of plant space
research (Medina et al., 2021). The most difﬁcult parameter to overcome in the space environment is
altered gravity level, because all other parameters such as oxygen and nutrient levels, humidity, tempera-
ture, or light conditions can be adjusted. Only cosmic radiation represents a challenge comparable to grav-
ity because of the lack of 100% effective protective shields. On the other hand, plants, like every organism
on Earth, have evolved under a constant gravity level and its modiﬁcation or absence may be a difﬁcult chal-
lenge to overcome for an organism.
There are different ways to study the effect of microgravity on an organism (Bo¨ hmer and Schleiff, 2019). Real
microgravity research onboard the International Space Station (ISS) provides the most valuable information
(Vandenbrink and Kiss, 2016), but it involves high cost and the access to it is very limited. Compared to a
typical ground experiment, which usually involves practically unlimited sample size and the necessary num-
ber of performing personnel, spaceﬂight research imposes major limitations, including the size of and
access to experiment equipment and the availability of trained staff and supplies needed to perform the
scientiﬁc work. Furthermore, there are signiﬁcant technical challenges that need to be overcome in the
design and development of the experimental hardware necessary to operate in low gravity conditions.
Retrieval, processing and storage of biological samples need to be optimized, in some cases by devel-
oping complex and costly procedures.
Despite all these constraints, six decades of research on the effects of long- and short-term missions to
space have resulted in a consistent knowledge of many aspects of the impact of extraterrestrial factors,
mainly exposure to microgravity, on biological systems. The story started with the sending to space of
the ﬁrst plant materials which were grown on unmanned vehicles. The Soviet Oasis 1 plant growth system,
1PCNPmG Lab (Plant Cell
Nucleolus, Proliferation and
Microgravity), Centro de
Investigaciones Biolo´ gicas
Margarita Salas - CSIC,
Ramiro de Maeztu 9, 28040
Madrid, Spain
2Institut Syste´ matique,
Evolution, Biodiversite´
(ISYEB), Muse´ um National
d’Histoire Naturelle, Sor-
bonne Universite´ , CNRS,
EPHE, UA, Paris, 75005,
France
3Lead contact
*Correspondence:
aranzazu@cib.csic.es (A.M.),
fjmedina@cib.csic.es (F.J.M.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2022.104687
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022 ª 2022 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS

the ﬁrst facility devoted to space plant research in history, was ﬂown on the Cosmos 368 ﬂight as early as
1970. Soon after, the facility was used by cosmonauts in the manned Salyut 1 mission in 1971 to grow
different plant crop species. Since then, different plant cultivation experiments have been ﬂown on crewed
vehicles, including the Soviet/Russian Salyut and Mir, the American Shuttle, the Chinese Shenzou, and the
ISS. Continuous subsystem improvements and increasing knowledge of plant responses to the spaceﬂight
environment has led to the design of Veggie and the Advanced Plant Habitat, latest in the series of plant
growth systems installed in the ISS (Ray et al., 2019; Zabel et al., 2016). All these steps were directed to
achieve the main objective of spaceﬂight biology, which was to gain an understanding of adaptive pro-
cesses triggered by terrestrial organisms when they are confronted with the novel space environment.
The knowledge of the environmental limits of terrestrial biology in spaceﬂight is key to the design of suc-
cessful space exploration strategies (Des Marais et al., 2008).
During spaceﬂight, exposure to a novel environment, previously unknown for terrestrial organisms, causes
them to modify their growth and development patterns to a greater or lesser extent. These patterns are
characterized by certain gene expression proﬁles capable of guiding growth and ensuring survival. During
spaceﬂight, some sets of genes that were repressed in other environmental conditions are expressed and
some other sets of genes are repressed in an attempt to cope with the new environment and adapt, or accli-
mate, to it (Paul et al., 2012). This response is not unique to plants, but it is enhanced in these organisms by
the great reserve of plasticity exhibited by plant genomes, that enables them to respond to unforeseen
environmental conditions, such as gravity alteration (Medina et al., 2021). In general, this plasticity is neces-
sary because of the sessile character of plants that immobilizes them to the ground and disables them to
escape to another place if the environmental conditions became adverse. One of the sources of genome
plasticity is gene redundancy, a feature much more extended in plants than in any other taxonomic group.
Plants have undergone extensive duplications (up to four times) of large genomic regions, producing a
large amount of duplicated genes (Wang et al., 2011). For example, multiple cyclins and CDKs involved
in cell proliferation control exhibit redundant mechanisms for producing the same effect in cell cycle check-
points (Francis, 2011). In addition to gene redundancy, quicker mechanisms like transposable elements or
epigenetic processes, such as DNA methylation operate under environmental stress (Lukens and Zhan,
2007).
This article revises the results of some relevant experiments performed in the ISS during the last decade
and the knowledge acquired from them in terms of changes in gene expression at the global genome level
(space omics). These changes are related to the acclimation or adaptation of plants to survive, grow and
develop under the altered gravity conditions of extraterrestrial environments, either the microgravity char-
acterizing spaceﬂight, or the partial gravity levels that can be found in the Moon and Mars surfaces.
Together with gravity, another environmental stimulus is analyzed extensively, which is light. Both gravity
and light are responsible for the two main tropisms that drive plant growth, namely gravitropism and
phototropism. The regulatory effects of light and gravity on plant growth are closely related. An
outstanding recent example of this relationship is the light regulation of the expression of LAZY4, a
gene that plays an important role in the gravitropic response of both shoots and roots (Yang et al.,
2020). In addition, upregulation of genes involved in a fundamental light-dependent function, such as
photosynthesis, has been found as a response to microgravity condition in spaceﬂight, and, interestingly,
this response occurred in etiolated plants, in the absence of any light signal (Kruse et al., 2020). The ques-
tion on whether the deleterious effects of altered gravity could be compensated by light, or not, is critical
for the success of plant culture in future human settlements on other planets, but attention to other sub-
optimal environmental parameters that may be unavoidable in spaceﬂight as cosmic radiation or reduced
access to water or gas exchange may be also evaluated. In that regard, this review pays particular attention
and its organized by the hardware used in each experiment, being crucial to understand the differential
results observed in the ‘‘habitats’’ provided for each facility, in terms of suboptimal environmental condi-
tions and particularly light.
The adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings under
darkness condition (BRIC experiments)
A series of experiments called ‘‘Biological Research in Canisters’’ (BRIC) were performed in the NASA BRIC
hardware, which consists of a simple compartment (canister) holding six 60-mm Petri dishes in small sub-
compartments called PDFUs (Petri Dish Fixation Unit cassettes) (Table S1). The PDFUs allow the sample ﬁx-
ation inside using an actuator gun. The BRIC hardware was ﬂown as nonpowered payload so the seedlings
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

were grown in the dark for the experiment duration, although a further development called BRIC-LED was
implemented, providing lighting capabilities. In particular, BRIC-16 consisted of three individual experi-
ments performed by three research groups as part of the STS-131 mission on the Space Shuttle Discovery
in 2010. All BRIC-16 ﬂight samples were grown in darkness for 309 h (12 days and 21h) and then ﬁxed in
RNAlater in-orbit. The Ground Control were BRICs prepared identical to spaceﬂight samples housed in
Orbital Environmental Simulator (OES) at the Spaceﬂight Life Sciences Laboratory (SLSL-KSC) with a
24-h delay to enable duplication of the environmental parameters (temperature, humidity, and CO2 con-
centration) collected by telemetry from the space shuttle (Johnson et al., 2017; Kwon et al., 2015; Paul
et al., 2012) (Table 1).
The BRIC-16-DNA experiment (Impact of Spaceﬂight on Arabidopsis: Deep Sequencing and DNA Arrays as
Collaborative Readouts of the Transcriptome of Arabidopsis Seedlings and Undifferentiated Cell in Space)
disclosed that A. thaliana ecotype Columbia (Col-0) seedlings grown in space change the expression of 300
genes with respect to ground control samples. Between the differentially genes expressed, genes upregu-
lated are associated with pathogen response, wounding, drought stress and cold stress (generalized
stress-response) and genes downregulated are transcription factors involved in cell wall metabolism and
cell elongation and genes encoding proteins that function in calcium-mediated signaling (gravitropism).
The authors suggest that both the gravity signaling system and the stress signaling related to wounding
and pathogens converge in their responses involving the actin-based cytoskeletal network attached to
plasma membrane and the cell wall. It is possible that any of these signaling mechanisms are balanced
by the force of gravity. Hence, the absence of gravity may confound the signaling system, inducing inap-
propriate stress responses as a consequence (Paul et al., 2012).
The transcriptional analysis of BRIC-16-Regulation experiment (Actin Regulation of Arabidopsis Root
Growth and Orientation During Space Flight) showed that spaceﬂight conditions triggered the downregu-
lation of genes involved in cell wall biogenesis and oxidative stress in Col-0 seedlings. Most of these genes
are expressed in root hairs (class III peroxidase genes) independently of actin pathways because they were
also downregulated in the other Arabidopsis line included in this experiment, the act2-3mutant. These
gene expression changes led to shorter root hairs in space-grown seedlings. It is unclear whether this effect
was due to microgravity per se or it was a consequence of other spaceﬂight environmental conditions pro-
ducing stress, such as hypoxia, which produces the same phenotypic effect. Actually, the BRIC hardware
system has several limitations: One is that the seedlings grow conﬁned in small sealed containers for
extended periods of time, and other is the absence of orbit 1g control which makes it difﬁcult to distinguish
true microgravity effects from other secondary spaceﬂight effects (Kwon et al., 2015).
BRIC-16-Cytoskeleton study (Investigations of the Plant Cytoskeleton in Microgravity with Gene Proﬁling
and Cytochemistry) focused on gene expression changes in shoots of Ler-0 plants. The functional analysis
showed that many upregulated transcripts in spaceﬂight conditions were implicated in metabolic process
and transport. Most of these genes were localized in the extracellular matrix and involved in cell wall modi-
ﬁcation. On the other hand, and unlike the other two BRIC-16 experiments, the downregulated genes were
often involved in stress response. This result was associated with the fact that the transcriptional analysis
only included shoots. At the same time, an abundance of adventitious roots (immediately transport oxygen
Table 1. Adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings under darkness
Conditions
Ecotype
Fixation
Tissue
Authors
GLDS
mg dark 12 days
Col-0
RNAlater
Seedlings
Paul et al. (2012)
GLDS-17
mg dark 12 days
Col-0
RNAlater
Seedlings
Kwon et al. (2015)
GLDS-44
mg dark 12 days
Ler-0
RNAlater
Shoot
Johnson et al. (2017)
GLDS-121
mg dark 8 days
Col-0, Ws-2, Ler-0 and Cvi-0
RNAlater
Seedlings
Choi et al. (2019)
GLDS-37
mg dark 3 days
Col-0
RNAlater
Seedlings
Kruse et al. (2020)
GLDS-38
mg dark 14 days
Col-0, atire1,
bzip60, bzip28, bzip28 bzip60
RNAlater
Seedlings
Angelos et al. (2021)
GLDS-321
Experiments performed in BRIC hardware, indicating the main characteristics of each of them: experimental conditions, ge-
notype, ﬁxation, tissue used to carry out the transcriptomic study, authors and the GeneLab Data Set (GLDS). See also
Table S1
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
3
iScience
Review

from the substrate to shoots) was observed in spaceﬂight seedlings, suggesting that roots may undergo
greater hypoxic stress than shoots during spaceﬂight. Therefore, pooling all plant organs together for a
single analysis could provide an incomplete picture.
The BRIC-16 was a cluster of spaceﬂight experiments performed during the same space mission (STS-131)
in the same hardware (Biological Research in Canister, BRIC) with the goal of studying the longer-term plant
survival response in the spaceﬂight environment. Despite these common features, and even though tran-
scripts within the same functional categories (stress response, defense, metabolic processes and cell wall
modiﬁcation) were found to be involved in the response in the different experiments, some differing results
were obtained. These differences were associated to the speciﬁc experimental conditions of each one of
the experiments: BRIC-16-DNA and BRIC-16-Regulation used the Col-0 ecotype as wild type whereas
BRIC-16-Cytoskeleton used the Ler-0 ecotype; BRIC-16-Regulation and BRIC-16-Cytoskeleton growth me-
dia was half-strength MS salts and 1% (w/v) sucrose in agar, but BRIC-16-DNA used only half-strength MS
salts in phytagel; BRIC-16-DNA and BRIC-16-Regulation used in microarray analysis RNA from entire seed-
lings whereas BRIC-16-Cytoskeleton used RNA from shoots only (Johnson et al., 2017).
The mission SpaceX CRS-4, launched on September 21, 2014, carried a new BRIC experiment with the aim of
dissecting plant stress responses and revealing novel pathways for these responses triggered in space. RNA
sequencing after growing for 8 days on board the ISS allowed the comparison of the transcriptomes of four
A. thaliana ecotypes (Col-0, Ws-2, Ler-0 and Cvi-0) with ground-based control (a duplicated set of BRICs trans-
ferred to the ISS Environmental Simulator-ISSES with a 48-h delay to the ﬂight experiment) (Table 1). Cvi-0 seed-
lings were those with the highest number of genes with deregulated expression, followed by Col-0 and WS-2
plants. In contrast, the Ler-0 plants barely showed changes in the expression of their genes. Common in all eco-
types, transcripts from heat-shock proteins (chaperones) were upregulated, whereas peroxidase transcripts
were downregulated in spaceﬂight (Choi et al., 2019). According to the authors, this shared induction of
molecular chaperones may help to protect cellular machinery from oxidative stress potentially triggered by
hardware-dependent hypoxic response. In fact, alterations in growth and molecular responses in seedlings
grown in BRIC have been described, raising the possibility that this hardware may impose intrinsic stresses
on the plants and cause a response in some genes unrelated with the spaceﬂight environment (Basu et al.,
2017; Johnson et al., 2017). The spaceﬂight ecotype-unique transcripts analysis showed that Cvi-0 was enriched
in genes involved in light stress, kinase signaling and cell wall modiﬁcation, Col-0 was enriched in transcripts
related to cold and sugar response and, in Ws-2, enrichment in responses related to oxidative stress response
was detected. Instead, Ler-0 also showed no signiﬁcantly over-represented processes because of the small
number of genes changing their expression. These results bring out signiﬁcant differences between ecotype
behavior, being Col-0 and Cvi-0 much more responsive to spaceﬂight conditions, whereas Ler-0 appeared
to be relatively resistant to the same conditions, and therefore, highlighting the need to carefully consider
the genetic background when comparing data sets and designing spaceﬂight experiments (Choi et al., 2019).
Another experiment that used the BRIC hardware to quantify protein and transcript differential expres-
sion of 3-day-old, etiolated Col-0 seedlings grown aboard the ISS, was launched on January 10, 2015
(Space-X CRS-5). The simultaneous proteomic and transcriptomic analyses provided a more complete
picture of plant response to spaceﬂight (Kruse et al., 2020). In addition to the ground control (at
ISSES with 48-h delay), in this experiment, two additional analyses were performed to eliminate signiﬁ-
cant changes in the transcriptome and proteome of Arabidopsis seedlings that could be attributed to
the hardware (Basu et al., 2017) or to the RNAlater preservative (Kruse et al., 2017) (Table 1). These
studies revealed marked impacts on post- transcriptional regulation, cell wall synthesis, redox/microtu-
bule dynamics and plastid gene transcription in the plants exposed to microgravity. The effects on micro-
tubule dynamics (alpha tubulins) were explained as a relevant physiological adaptation to the spaceﬂight
environment, because alpha tubulin has the potential to enhance cytoskeletal organization and cell wall
composition, thereby enhancing the structural integrity of cells in microgravity. A wide variety of plastid-
localized and plastid-produced genes appeared differentially regulated in the ﬂight samples, but they
were not present in the proteomic data. This result was surprising because BRIC hardware prevents all
light from reaching the plants, and it was interpreted as a wasteful effort to enhancing light signaling
to compensate for the absence of gravity. In summary, the uniﬁed transcriptomic and proteomic analysis
points out the regulation of speciﬁc elements of cell wall, microtubule synthesis and plastid transcripts
production as three new targets to achieve optimal plant growth during future long-term spaceﬂight mis-
sions (Kruse et al., 2020).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

During SpaceX CRS-12 mission (launched August 14, 2017) transcriptional responses of Col-0 seedlings
and seedlings with a compromised unfolded protein response (UPR) to spaceﬂight were examined with
the objective of studying how this response, which is a signaling cascade that responds to a number of un-
favorable environmental and cellular stresses, could coordinate gene expression reprogramming in space-
ﬂight stress conditions. For this, the BRIC-PDFU sterile plant culture hardware was used to grow for 14 days
Arabidopsis thaliana wildtype and mutants defective in one or more components of the UPR, namely the
TFs bZIP28 and bZIP60 (single and double mutants: bzip28, bzip60 and bzip28 bzip60) and the ER-resident
kinase/ribonuclease IRE1 (atire1). The transcriptomic results showed that growth in orbit substantially
altered expression of thousands of genes associated with biological functions compared with ground con-
trol across all genotypes. Speciﬁcally, WT had the largest number of differentially expressed genes (1675
DEGs upregulated and 831 DEGs downregulated) and the bzip28 bzip60 mutant had the smallest number
of DEGs (1293 upregulated and 562 downregulated). Among these DEGs, 34.8% (783/2249) of upregulated
and 27.5% (335//1217) of downregulated overlapped across all genotypes whereas relatively smaller
numbers of DEGs were found to be genotype-speciﬁc. Therefore, with the aim to gain more insights
into the transcriptome changes caused by the absence of a correct UPR signaling under both ground
and space ﬂight conditions, the authors performed K-means clustering analysis on FPKM values for all
DEGs. This analysis became clear that many of these spaceﬂight responsive genes were regulated uniquely
in certain UPR mutants compared with WT in the ground control and that these variations in ground sam-
ples expression were largely muted by spaceﬂight. Therefore, a genotype-speciﬁc regulation in spaceﬂight
condition was not observed. Overall, these results would suggest that the UPR does not have a broad
involvement in the response to spaceﬂight but could play a partial role in regulating the transcriptional re-
programming in space compared with ground control. The reason could be that under space ﬂight condi-
tions many related stress-responsive genes were downregulated, being able to produce alternative
signaling pathways, which repress the observed stress responses regulated by UPR (Angelos et al., 2021).
The adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings under
light conditions
The TAGES (Transgenic Arabidopsis Gene Expression System) ﬂight experiment, constituted by several in-
dependent runs launched to the ISS (Run 1: STS-129 November 16, 2009. Run 2: STS-130 February 8, 2010.
Run 3: STS-131 April 5, 2010) was conducted within the ABRS (Advanced Biological Research System) hard-
ware. This facility allowed to grow Arabidopsis seedlings on standard laboratory Petri plates and provided
controlled lighting, temperature and air quality, and minimizing hardware-induced stress factors. In the
three biological replicates, seedlings germinated, grew for 12 days and were harvested on orbit to RNA-
later-ﬁlled KSC Fixation Tubes (KFTs). After returning to Earth, they were dissected into roots, leaves
and hypocotyls for transcriptomic analysis (microarray). Ground control experiments (one per biological
replicate) were conducted using identical ABRS hardware housed in OES chamber programmed to ISS
environmental conditions (Paul et al., 2013) (Table 2). The microarray analysis showed that only 480 genes
were differentially expressed in spaceﬂight samples in any organ, but most of these genes were not coor-
dinately expressed among organs (only 26 genes were common in roots, hypocotyls and leaves). Although
each organ displayed unique patterns of gene expression in response to spaceﬂight, the genes were
involved in the same functional processes: the down-regulated genes were largely associated with factors
regulating cell elongation and hormone signal transduction and the up-regulated genes were closely asso-
ciated with pathogen responses, wounding and cell wall remodeling. Based on the results obtained, the
authors pointed out that spaceﬂight environments had become extremely well controlled, there hardly be-
ing hardware-dependent factors, as indicated by the low number of genes with deregulated expression
(48). Therefore, leaves, roots, and hypocotyls engage different genes in response to the spaceﬂight envi-
ronment, but utilize similar adaptive strategies, consisting of initiating cellular remodeling and maximizing
other environmental cues (for example, light) in a morphological response which is essential to produce a
correct growth and development (Paul et al., 2013).
The CARA experiment (Characterizing Arabidopsis Root Attractions, launched on SpaceX CRS-3, April 18th
2014) consisted of growing three Arabidopsis thaliana genotypes (wild-types Wassilewskija (WS),
Columbia-0 (Col-0) and phytochrome D mutant Col-0 PhyD (phyD)) on Phytagel plates for 11 days secured
to a fabric support to the wall in the US lab of the ISS Destiny module. Some of them grew with the ambient
light of ISS and some in the dark, wrapped in blackout cloth. After a growth period of 11 days, samples were
harvested into KFTs containing RNAlater. A comparable set of plates, grown within the ISSES, monitoring
temperature, CO2, relative humidity and light levels, with a delay of 24 h after the initiation of the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
5
iScience
Review

spaceﬂight experiment, was the ground control (Paul et al., 2017) (Table 2). The transcriptome responses in
the root tips, which was the unique tissue used, showed that differentially expressed genes unique to each
genotype were more abundant than those shared with another genotype. Under light exposure, Col-0
showed the greatest number of genes differentially expressed in spaceﬂight (297), phyD changed the
expression of 130 genes and in WS only 71 genes were deregulated. Furthermore, each genotype used
almost completely different sets of genes to physiologically adapt to the environment of the ISS. If this dif-
ferential gene expression is considered as a measure of the physiological adaptive response cost, the WS
ecotype would be better adapted to spaceﬂight than Col-0, and phyD mutation would be considered as a
spaceﬂight-adaptive mutation in Col-0 background, suggesting that the plant genotype can be manipu-
lated to reduce the metabolic cost of spaceﬂight adaptation. In the dark, WS and Col-0 seedlings showed
roughly the same number of differentially expressed genes (218 and 224, respectively) and phyD exhibited
the fewest genes with differential expression (131) indicating that the light environment affects physiolog-
ical adaptation to spaceﬂight, which implies that the local habitat can be another factor that can be manip-
ulated to reduce this cost. In this space experiment, all three genotypes were developmentally comparable
to the ground control plants and they were equally productive in terms of root length so that only coordi-
nately expressed genes shared amongst the genotypes (18 genes in light and 11 in dark) were considered
fundamentally required for physiological adaptation of Arabidopsis to spaceﬂight. Most of them were up-
regulated genes associated with defense mechanisms or cell wall (Paul et al., 2017).
The RNA sequencing data collected from root tissue of Col-0 and WS seedlings grown in APEX03-2
(Advanced Plant Experiment 03–2) space experiment was used to investigate the role of alternative splicing
during spaceﬂight adaptation in plants because it was described that terrestrial plant stressors arise unique
alternative splicing patterns. In APEX03-2 experiment, launched on SpaceX mission CRS-5 on 10 January
2015, the seedlings grew on Phytagel Petri dishes kept in vertical racks perpendicularly oriented to the light
source within the Vegetable Production System (VPS/VEGGIE) on board the ISS. The ground control was
carried out inside the VPS ground unit within the ISSES chamber at KSC with a 48-h delay (Beisel et al.,
2019; Ferl and Paul, 2016) (Table 2). Opposite to the pattern observed for differentially expressed genes,
the analysis of the alternative splicing showed that fewer genes undergo spaceﬂight-induced signiﬁcant
differential alternative splicing in the Col-0 ecotype background (27) as compared to WS (48), with only
Table 2. Adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings under light conditions
Conditions
Ecotype
Fixation
Tissue
Authors
GLDS
ABRS
mg light
12 days
Adh:GFP,
DR5r:GFP,35s:GFP
RNAlater
Root Leaf
Hypocotyl
Paul et al. (2013)
GLDS-7
CARA
mg
dark/ambient
light 11 days
WS, Col-0, phyD
RNAlater
Root tips
Paul et al. (2017)
GLDS-120
SJ-10
1g 3 days 16h
light mg 2,5 days
16h light
Col-0
RNAlater
Seedlings
Xu et al. (2018)
GLDS-220
mg short-day
long-day 48 days
Col-0, pHSP:FT,
pHSP:GF
RNAlater
Rosette
leaves
Xie et al. (2022)
NA
VPS
Mg constant
light 4/8 days
WS, Col-0
RNAlater
Root
Beisel et al. (2019)
GLDS-218
mg constant
light 11 days
WS
RNAlater
Root Leaf
Zhou et al.(2019)
GLDS-217
Mg constant
light 4/8 days
Col-0, spr1,
WS, sku5
RNAlater
Root
Califar et al. (2020)
GLDS-218
Mg constant
light 11 days
Col-0, met1-7,
elp2-5
RNAlater
Root Leaf
Paul et al. (2021)
GLDS-416
GLDS-427
TG-2
mg short-day
long-day 27 days
Col0, pFT:GFP, ft-10
RNAlater
Rosette
leaves
Wang et al., 2022
NA
Experiments performed in different hardware that provided illumination, indicating the main characteristics of each of them:
Experimental conditions, genotype, ﬁxation, tissue used to carry out the transcriptomic study, authors and the GeneLab data-
set (GLDS). See also Table S1
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

5 overlapping genes between them (Paul et al., 2017). Moreover, gene ontology analysis did not reveal any
obvious conclusions respect to the function or localization of the genes with alternative splicing during
spaceﬂight exposure. Although the detection of alternatively spliced transcript isoforms in spaceﬂight
samples, regarding abundance, types, and functional implications, is still pending further investigation,
this study presented strong evidence that alternative splicing plays a role in the process of molecular adap-
tation to the spaceﬂight environment in plants (Beisel et al., 2019).
The Advanced Plant Experiments 03–2 also studied the hypothesis that skewing pathways play a large role
in spaceﬂight adaptation via cell wall remodeling. Differential gene expression proﬁles of two mutants,
differing in their ecotype background, defective in two well-characterized genes which affect different
skewing control pathways (spr1 and sku5) and their wild type controls (Col-0 and WS) were examined after
growing for 4 and 8 days on ISS. SPIRAL1 plays a role in directional cell expansion by regulating cortical
microtubule dynamics and spr1mutation results in axial rotation of cell ﬁles throughout the plant, which
manifests in roots as skewing to the left. SKU5 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored cell wall and
plasma membrane protein implicated in stress response signaling and sku5mutant exhibits rightward
skewing (Table 2).Morphological data (angle between the root tip and the initial direction of root growth
in the 4-day-old seedlings) showed that spr1 seedlings exhibited a consistent leftward skewing phenotype
on Earth that was substantially enhanced by spaceﬂight. Instead, sku5mutant showed a prevention of skew-
ing in spaceﬂight compared to the ground control. The root length was not altered in either mutant line by
spaceﬂight. The transcriptomic analysis revealed that in spr1 seedlings the number of differential gene
expression under spaceﬂight condition was less than in Col-0 seedlings. In addition, both lines differentially
expressed fewer genes at the 8-day timepoint than at 4-day. In contrast, sku5 seedlings the spaceﬂight
differentially expressed genes were ﬁve-fold and two-fold more than WS at 4 days and 8 days, respectively.
Also, both genotypes increase in their deregulated genes between 4 and 8 days.
Among genes that were upregulated in spaceﬂight for sku5 many were LEA (Late Embryogenesis abun-
dant) family genes, associated with seed dormancy, negative regulation of post-embryonic development
and ABA signaling to enhance stress resistance (osmotic, cold, and drought) through membrane stabiliza-
tion, ROS sequestration and protein aggregation prevention. Moreover, processes involved with salt, ROS
stress, and light responses were terms enriched signiﬁcantly at 4 days and at 8 days and terms associated
with cell wall remodeling and biosynthetic processes were overrepresented.
The sku5 and spr1 different gene expression patterns, considering the number of differentially expressed
genes and their fold-change levels as a measure of metabolic cost of adapting to environment, suggest
that mutation of the SPR1 skewing pathway enhances spaceﬂight physiological adaptation and the SKU5
pathway plays a key role in adaptation to this environment. Furthermore, the fact that spr1 and sku5
root lengths are not altered by spaceﬂight, indicate that the effects of these mutations lie in processes di-
recting morphology and structure and not in growth processes (Califar et al., 2020).
WS seedlings grown in the spaceﬂight experiment APEX03-2 for 11 days with constant light were used for
the determination of differential methylation of leaves and roots (bisulﬁte DNA sequencing) and differen-
tial gene expression (RNA sequencing) in response to spaceﬂight (Table 2). The authors expected to eluci-
date the role played by the epigenome in the physiological adaptation to spaceﬂight. It is well documented
that terrestrial biotic and abiotic stresses, such as pathogen attack, salt, and drought stress, are elicitors of
differential DNA methylation (Zhou et al., 2019). Many genes of the networks involved in the response to
these stresses are differentially expressed by plants in spaceﬂight. The results indicated that although large
scale alteration of the average methylation level was not detected in CG, CHG and CHH contexts between
ﬂight and ground DNA, thousands of speciﬁcally differentially methylated cytosines were discovered with
clear organ-speciﬁc patterns. In roots, hypomethylated CHH sites predominated whereas leaves showed a
predominance of hypermethylated CHH sites. In leaves, about one-ﬁfth of the genes differentially ex-
pressed in response to spaceﬂight (143 out of 743) were also differentially methylated (DmC-DEG), but
in roots the fraction was about one-third (75 differentially expressed genes, 21 of which were also differen-
tially methylated). Gene ontology analysis detected stress response to abiotic stimulus, temperature, radi-
ation, and light stimulus categories in roots. In leaves, the detected categories included response to
stressors of temperature, radiation and light, plus chemical stress, oxidative stress and a response to oxy-
gen-containing compounds. In addition, in leaves, a 46% of DmC-DEG set were associated with reactive
oxygen species (ROS). These results suggested that although DNA methylation may play a signiﬁcant
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
7
iScience
Review

role in a portion of the genes regulated by spaceﬂight, it is clearly not the only factor in this regulation.
Furthermore, ROS genes may play a unique role in the adaptation of plants to the spaceﬂight (Zhou
et al., 2019).
Furthermore, in ‘‘The Advanced Plant Experiment-04-Epigenetic Expression’’ experiment, launched on the
SpaceX mission CRS-10 on 19 February 2017, two methylation mutant lines (met1-7 and elp2-5) were grown
on the ISS to assess their response to spaceﬂight compared to that of wild type (Col-0). The plants grew in
the Veggie hardware (both on the ISS and in the ISEES chamber) with constant light conditions for 11 days,
before being ﬁxed in RNAlater into KFTs. Once on Earth, leaf and root tissues were dissected and, from
each sample, whole-genome bisulﬁte sequencing (WGBS) and RNA sequencing (RNAseq) was performed
(Table 2). The two mutant lines are deﬁcient in separate and distinct functions that affect methylation. MET1
(methyl transferase) is directly involved in the maintenance (particularly at CG sites) of cytosine methylation
in Arabidopsis and is an enzyme that modiﬁes the epigenome, as part of stress responses. ELP2 (Elongator
Protein) interacts with components of the siRNA machinery inducing cytosine methylation by recruitment of
the DNA methyl transferase DRM2 and is associated with terrestrial pathogen responses, playing a role in
root development (Paul et al., 2021). The results reinforced that, in overall average, genome methylation is
not a hallmark of spaceﬂight adaptation in wild type plants because, for Col-0 plants, the degree of the
genome-wide methylation was not statistically signiﬁcant between spaceﬂight and ground control sam-
ples. Instead, both elp2-5 and mit1-7 plants were generally hypermethylated in spaceﬂight environment
compared to the ground control. Each of the mutant lines demonstrated a different pattern of organ-spe-
ciﬁc expression and methylation. In met1-7 plants, a large proportion of the differentially methylated and
expressed genes in leaves was observed (72 out of 226), whereas in elp2-5, the large proportion of the
differentially methylated and expressed genes (101 out of 120) was observed in roots, suggesting that
MET1 plays a more important role in leaves and ELP2 in roots, in the process of physiological adaptation
to spaceﬂight. The functional analysis showed that differential methylation took place in elp2-5 line,
together with the expression of gene classes that were associated with the spaceﬂight response in previous
experiments, such as, metabolic processes and defense, hormone, and hypoxic responses. Besides, these
same spaceﬂight-associated processes were also among the primary classes enriched in the spaceﬂight
acclimation of Col-0. Conversely, the mutant met1-7 line showed relatively few GO term enrichments, pre-
dominantly associated with signal transduction, as membrane transporters or transcriptional activators.
These data suggest that met1-7 plants were better adapted to spaceﬂight than elp2-5plants, and that
the response to spaceﬂight environment acts more directly through mechanisms regulated by ELP2 than
through those regulated by MET1 (Paul et al., 2021).
Epigenetic changes in Arabidopsis seedlings in response to spaceﬂight were studied by conducting a whole
genome bisulfate sequencing to discover and qualitatively assess spaceﬂight-associated 5-methyl cytosine
epigenetic modiﬁcations. In this experiment, 6- day-old Col-0 plants pre-cultured on ground were transferred
to culture chambers aboard the Chinese recoverable scientiﬁc satellite SJ-10 (launched on April 6 and landed
on April 18, 2016) and after grown up to 60 h (2.5 days) under microgravity conditions, seedlings were ﬁxed with
RNAlater using a canal system and pump support system included in the equipment.
The results demonstrated that lower methylation levels in CHG, CHH, and CpG context tended to occur
under microgravity conditions. The molecular function analysis of differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) showed that they correspond to genes involved especially in hormone signaling pathways
including auxin, ABA, ethylene, and brassinosteroids, genes encoding transcription factors (TF) and genes
associated with cell wall metabolism. In addition to methylation alterations at the gene level, transposon
elements (TE) showed altered methylation levels during spaceﬂight. Overall, these results indicate that
alterations in the methylation of auxin-related genes and cell wall may play important roles in plants adap-
tation to microgravity and DNA demethylation within TEs may cause transcriptional alterations in transpo-
sons during adaptation to spaceﬂight conditions (Xu et al., 2018).
Contrary to previous experiments that focus on studying the early adaptation response to the space envi-
ronment, two Chinese missions whose results have been recently published, have focused on studying
gene expression changes in the reproductive stage of A. thaliana plants. Because successful completion
of the plant seed-to-seed cycle was considered essential to support human life in long-term manned mis-
sions, the main objective of these two experiments was to examine how two different photoperiod condi-
tions could affect ﬂowering time under microgravity. (Wang et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022). One of the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

experiments was carried out on board spacelab TG-2 (launched on September 15, 2016) in Plant Culture
Box (PCB) hardware that controls the atmosphere, temperature, and hydrates the plants. Sterile seeds
of WT (Col-0), pFT:GFP transgenic plants and ft-10 were set on the panel root module containing commer-
cially available vermiculite and stored dry until their hydration. The plants germinated and grew at 21C
under short-day (SD, 8h light/16h dark) or under long-day (LD, 16h light/8h dark) for 48 days, when one
of LD PCBs with Arabidopsis plants was taken out by an astronaut and ﬁxed with the RNAlater solution
for transcriptomics analysis (Table 2). The initiation of bolting (start of peduncle growth) was delayed under
the LD condition on board spaceﬂight (42 days after sown in spaceﬂight and 25 days after sown on ground
control). According to this result, FT expression occurred later under this light condition because in the
ground control the GFP ﬂuorescence reached peak levels at 22 days after sowing and in microgravity
the ﬂuorescence peak was reached at 43 days after sowing. The microarray analysis performed using the
leaves of WT plants grown under LD revealed that 1793 genes were upregulated whereas there were
1669 downregulated genes in the spaceﬂight samples with respect to their corresponding ground control.
Among the DEGs, 53 ﬂowering genes were identiﬁed and classiﬁed according to their known or predicted
function in the ﬂowering regulation pathway. The data showed that FT expression was upregulated along
with a few genes involved in photoperiodism and circadian clock whereas the expression of SOC1
decreased accompanied by the downregulation of key genes involved in the response to the photoperiod,
circadian clock, vernalization, ambient temperature, gibberellins and aging. These results indicate for the
ﬁrst time that FT and SOC1 could be key genes for A. thaliana plants to integrate spaceﬂight condition
stress signaling into ﬂowering regulation pathways (Xie et al., 2022).
The second experiment was carried out on the Chinese recoverable satellite SJ-10 (launched on April 6, 2016).
The plant growth system used consisted of four growth compartments, illumination, photograph, air-ﬂowing,
heating, and humidity controlling system. The A. thaliana lines used were WT (Col-0) and transgenic plants
(pHSP:FT, pHSP:GFP or FG) expressing FT together Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) under control of a
heat shock-inducible promoter (HSP17.4), by which it is possible to induce FT expression in-ﬂight by heat shock
treatment. The plants loaded in the growth chambers were germinated and grown in the root modules on
ground under LD or SD conditions for 20 days, so they had about six to seven rosette leaves when the satellite
was launched. After 12 days and 15 h in orbit, SJ-10 returned to Earth and 2 h after landing the plants were
harvested and ﬁxed with RNAlater solution (Table 2). As the images taken during the development of the
experiment revealed, under the LD condition ﬂowering occurred two days later in the space samples than in
the ground controls for both the WT plants and the FG plants. In contrast, under the SD condition after
heat shock treatment (37C for 1h), in WT plants this delay was reduced to 1 day and in FG plants it disap-
peared, ﬂowering both on ground and in space at 3 days. Microarray analysis was performed using the total
RNA from leaves of WT and FG plants grown under LD and the SD in space and on ground, respectively. In
the study of the categories of gene expression affected by spaceﬂight under different photoperiods, 4512
genes in WT and 4201 genes in FG response speciﬁcally to the LD or the SD (named "daylength-related-
sp" or "dl-sp"). This higher number of ‘‘dl-sp’’ genes indicates that daylength is an important factor to regulate
the response of plants to spaceﬂight. To further study response of plants to spaceﬂight after FT expression in
the FG plants under the SD in comparison with WT plants, the authors compared the number of DEGs in
response to spaceﬂight under the LD and the SD, respectively, among WT and FG samples. In these compar-
isons, they identiﬁed that 534 DEGS represented the group of genes in FG under the SD condition insensitive
to spaceﬂight stress (unchanged in FG under the LD in space) and they were involved in cellular metabolic pro-
cesses, as amino acid, amine, and oxoacid metabolic process.
Conversely, the most sensitive genes to spaceﬂight in FG plants under the SD condition (was signiﬁcantly
altered only in this condition) were 467 DEGs, many of them related with abiotic stimulus response and
post-translational protein modiﬁcation. Finally, 251 DEGs with function in chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway
and response to stimulus non-changed their expression in WT under SD. These transcriptomic results
together with bolting times indicated that heat shock-induced FT expression in FG plants could be used
as a gen switch for ﬂowering induction in space, which could change the sensitivity to the abiotic stimulus
and/or cellular metabolic processes and therefore, alter plant response to spaceﬂight (Wang et al., 2022).
Gene expression changes in well-controlled environmental conditions including several light
proﬁles and partial gravity levels (EMCS experiments)
The European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) was another hardware facility aboard ISS which was
used to grow plants on space. It provided directional light with white LEDs, controlled environment
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
9
iScience
Review

conditions (temperature, humidity, CO2, O2 and ethylene concentration) and it was equipped with two
centrifuges that allowed to incubate the samples at different levels of gravity, up to 2g. This allowed
them to perform an on-board 1g control, and also to incubate the samples at the so-called ‘‘partial grav-
ity levels’’, lower than 1g, such as those characterizing the surfaces of the Moon and Mars. In the TROPI-2
experiment (launched on space shuttle mission STS-130 in February 2010) WT seedlings of Arabidopsis
thaliana Landsberg erecta (Ler) ecotype were grown for 6 days within the EMCS, and they were photo-
stimulated with blue or red light at seven gravitational acceleration levels (mg, 0.07g, 0.13g, 0.21g, 0.39g,
0.53g and 1g) for the last 48h of the growth period. For seedling growth, photostimulation and video
recording, samples were contained in special cassettes equipped with a hydration mechanism remotely
operated, blue, red and white LEDs, which were used instead of the EMCS lighting system, and an ‘‘anti-
fog’’ device that prevented water condensation from the cassette window. After the photostimulation
phase, a crew member transferred samples from the EMCS to the to the MELFI (Minus-Eighty Degree
Laboratory Freezer for ISS) facility for preservation until download. The ground control was performed
in a laboratory incubator following the exact timeline and light treatments as the spaceﬂight experiment
(Kiss et al., 2012). TROPI-2 experiment was a duplication of the original TROPI experiment after the prob-
lems experienced with the samples because of the presence of toxic volatile substances in the hardware
(Table 3).
The primary objectives of the TROPI-2 experiment were to study plant tropisms in spaceﬂight (interaction
between gravitropic and phototropic signals) using images, but samples from this experiment were also
used to perform transcriptome analyses with RNA was extracted from whole seedlings, with the purpose
of maximizing the scientiﬁc returns of the spaceﬂight experiment. The comparison between all spaceﬂight
samples, regardless of their gravity or light treatment, with the 1g ground samples, identiﬁed 280 genes
that were differentially regulated. However, in the comparison of all g-treated spaceﬂight samples with
microgravity samples, only 130 genes were identiﬁed as being differently regulated. From these genes,
several of them were involved in cell polarity, cell defense or stress, and cell wall development. This result
suggested that all of the spaceﬂight samples had a more similar environment because overall fewer num-
ber of genes were differentially expressed in the second comparison than in the ﬁrst one, supporting the
role that gravity plays in affecting these key developmental pathways, which were both represented in the
two comparisons. In addition, as this hardware allowed performing a 1g-spaceﬂight control, these samples
were compared with the 1g ground control. This resulted in a large number of genes differentially regu-
lated (230), many of them implicated in cell-wall development, cell polarity and oxygen responses, among
other categories. The fact that the 1g spaceﬂight versus 1g ground samples revealed many genes with de-
regulated expression could be because of spaceﬂight effects other than microgravity (vibration, radiation
exposure, etc), emphasizing the need for tissue ﬁxation on board the ISS and better environmental moni-
toring tools to improve ground experiments (Correll et al., 2013).
Table 3. Adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings under light condition and
partial gravity levels
Conditions
Ecotype
Fixation
Tissue
Authors
GLDS
1g white light 4 days mg,
0.07g, 0.13g, 0.21g, 0.39g,
0.53g and 1g red light 2 days
Ler-0
Freeze 80C
Seedlings
Correll et al. (2013)
NA
1g white light 4 days mg,
0.09g, 0.18g, 0.36g, 0.57g
and 1g blue light 2 days
Ler-0
Freeze 80C
Seedlings
Vandenbrink
et al. (2019); Herranz
et al. (2019)
GLDS-251
mg and 0.36g white light 16h/dark
8h 4 days red light 2 days
Col-0
Freeze 80C
Seedlings
Villacampa et al. (2021)
GLDS-314
1g (Ground Control) white light
16h/dark 8h 4 days red light 2 days
Col-0, nuc1-2
nuc2-2
Freeze 80C
Seedlings
Manzano et al. (2020)
GLDS-313
mg, 0.53g, 0.65g and 0.88g
constant light 5 days
Col-0
Freeze 80C
Root
Sheppard et al. (2021)
GLDS-223
Experiments performed in EMCS hardware, indicating the main characteristics of each of them: experimental conditions, ge-
notype, ﬁxation, tissue used to carry out the transcriptomic study, authors and the GeneLab Data Set (GLDS). See also
Table S1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

The Seedling Growth project (SG) was another plant space experiment performed in EMCS hardware,
which consisted of three phases, each performed in different spaceﬂights: SG1 (uploaded via SpaceX
CRS-2 in March 2013), SG2 (uploaded via SpaceX CRS-4 in September 2014) and SG3 (uploaded via SpaceX
CRS-11 in June 2017). The goal of this project was to unraveling the link between the two main environ-
mental cues driving plant development (light and gravity) at reduced gravity levels. Speciﬁcally, the project
aimed at exploring if, and to what extent, speciﬁc light conditions could be applied to overcome, or at least
to mitigate the deleterious effects caused by the lack of gravity on plant growth and development, thus
facilitating the adaptation of plants to the space environment (Table 3). Ler seedlings grew under 6 nominal
gravity levels (mg, 0.09g or low gravity, 0.18g or Moon gravity, 0.36g or Mars gravity, 0.57g or reduced Earth
gravity, and 1.0g) illuminated under white light for 96h (4 days) followed by 48h (2 days) of unidirectional
photostimulation with blue light. The transcriptome analysis (RNAseq) of these samples revealed differen-
tial gene families affected and a clear difference in the intensity of the transcriptional response. At micro-
gravity level photosynthesis, photosynthetic antenna proteins, porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism, and
protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum were downregulated pathways. Nevertheless, only two
pathways, ribosome synthesis and oxidative phosphorylation were found to be upregulated. These results
suggested that a possible interplay between plant growth in microgravity and plastid function could exist
(Vandenbrink et al., 2019). The analysis focused on partial gravity levels showed that as the gravity load
increased the number of differentially expressed genes with respect to 1g control decreased, with a
remarkable exception of the low gravity level (lower than 0.1g), which is the one that resulted in the highest
number of deregulated genes. The DEG number was 296 in microgravity, 568 in low gravity, 123 in Moon
gravity, 19 in Mars gravity and only 2 genes in reduced Earth gravity. In addition, the functional Gene
Ontology (GO) analysis only identiﬁed enriched categories in mg, low-g and Moon g-level, which were
clearly different with the increasing partial-g level. In microgravity, light and photosynthesis GO terms
were enriched, whereas response to stress, response to chemicals, and response to hormones were en-
riched in low gravity and the more representative enrichment in Moon gravity was related to cell wall
and membrane structure. The general stress response detected in low gravity level was explained as the
consequence of competition between phototropism (blue light) and the weak gravitropism signal
(0.09g) to be the fundamental cue for driving seedling growth and plant development, resulting in a stress
for the plant. Instead, the existence of the gravitropic response along with blue light illumination seemed to
be enough to restore a nearly normal transcriptional state, particularly at Mars gravity level (Herranz et al.,
2019).
The SG project also studied by transcriptomic changes the adaptive response of A. thaliana Col-0 seed-
lings grown at two nominal gravity levels (mg and Mars gravity level, or 0.3g). These samples were illumi-
nated for 4 days in a long-day photoperiod (16h white light and 8h dark) and in the last 2 days of growth
period half of them were photostimulated with red light and the other half were kept in darkness (Table 3).
The results indicated that only in microgravity condition, both in darkness and under red light, elevated
plastid and mitochondrial genome expression was observed, being probably associated with a disturbed
retrograde and anterograde communication between these organelles and the nucleus. Furthermore, in
this condition, genes involved in hormonal pathways that promote proliferation, such as auxin and cyto-
kinin signal transduction, were activated. On the other hand, at Mars g-level genes of hormone pathways
related with stress response (abscisic acid, ethylene and salicylic acid) were activated. Furthermore, upre-
gulation of environmental acclimation-related transcriptions factors (WRKY and NACs families) was also
observed, especially in samples grown at Mars gravity level and photostimulated with red light, suggesting
that seedlings grown in partial gravity level are able to acclimate by modulating genome expression in
routes activated to cope with space environment-associated stress (Villacampa et al., 2021).
Under these same growing conditions, two knockout lines of nucleolin protein, nuc1-2 and nuc2-2,
affecting the two variants of this gene in A. thaliana, were grown in the SG series spaceﬂight experiments.
The use of the nucleolin mutants can signiﬁcantly contribute to the knowledge of the plant response to
spaceﬂight environment, because NUC1 protein occupies a central position in ribosome biogenesis regu-
lation, a complex stress-sensitive process which has been found to be seriously altered under conditions of
spaceﬂight. In addition, NUC1 gene expression is known to be upregulated by red light on Earth. In turn,
NUC2 protein participates in the mechanisms of adaptive responses to different stresses. First, transcrip-
tome analysis was performed only with ground control samples with the purpose of knowing the response
of nucleolin mutants to different illumination conditions, namely red light and darkness (Table 3). Under red
light photostimulation, ribosome biogenesis was the most signiﬁcantly enriched category within the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
11
iScience
Review

upregulated genes in nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2. On seedlings kept in darkness during the last 2 days of culti-
vation, gene categories mainly involved in processes of cell division appeared promoted, and gene cate-
gories mainly related to developmental processes were downregulated in nuc1-2 seedlings versus WT and
nuc2-2 seedlings. All these results indicate that on Earth the partial capability of the NUC2 gene of replac-
ing the functions of NUC1 gene in darkness, when this gene is not present, is enhanced by red light.
Furthermore, this photoactivation induces in the nuc2-2mutant an increased expression of genes
belonging to functional groups associated to stress response, which means that NUC2 protein has a
greater capacity of response to environmental signals, such as illumination with red light, and therefore,
nuc2-2 plants cannot develop a full response to this stimulus. The results of this work bring out, in
space-omics spaceﬂight experiments, the need to pay special attention to the ground reference controls
because identifying the genetic background in the this condition is essential before conclusions can be
made on the spaceﬂight results (Manzano et al., 2020).
The ‘‘Plant Signaling’’ experiment, also carried out in the EMCS (launched in July 2011 aboard STS-135),
studied the transcriptional proﬁling of root samples exposed for 5 days under continuous light at micro-
gravity or partial g (0.53g, 0.65g and 0.88g) (Table 3). The analysis identiﬁed 101 genes whose expression
levels were associated with gravity dose following three different patterns: increase or decrease expression
in response to increasing g levels (dose-dependent linear response), peak or dip at an intermediate g level
(peak up or peak down response) and induced or repressed expression levels to a threshold g level
(threshold response). In addition, the identiﬁcation of the biological functions or pathways of these 101
fractional-g responsive genes showed that they were genes involved in transcription regulation, chaperone
function, cell wall and defense response. All of these categories had been previously described as being
responsive to the plant response to the space environment (Sheppard et al., 2021).
Adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of other plant species
The molecular response to the long-term spaceﬂight environment of Mizuna plants was measured using
genome-wide mRNA expression analysis (mRNAseq). Seeds of Brassica rapa var. nipposinica (Mizuna)
were germinated and grown in Lada growth chambers aboard to Zvezda module of ISS. These chambers
include a root module, leaf chamber and light module. After 27 days cultivation, the plants were harvested
and stored at 80C in the MELFI freezer. Once back on Earth, total RNA from leaves samples was
extracted.
The fresh weight and water content (spaceﬂight: 82.9g and 92.5%, ground control: 58.0g and 92.0%)
showed that Mizuna plants grew as well or better under spaceﬂight environment than on the ground.
The transcriptomic analysis revealed that in space-grown plants a total of 20 in 32 ROS oxidative markers
were upregulated more than two-fold, including the major ROS-scavenging enzymes: thioredoxin and glu-
taredoxin. In addition, two ROS-producing genes (NADPH oxidase genes: RbohD and RbohF) were upre-
gulated 3-fold and 5.1-fold, respectively. These ﬁndings suggest that the Mizuna plants can acclimate to
long-term exposure in the spaceﬂight environment by reprogramming ROS gene network expression, pro-
ducing ROS to maintain the activation of ROS signal network to control the defense system with ROS-scav-
enging system (Sugimoto et al., 2014).
Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment (Table S2)
Arabidopsis thaliana wild type semisolid callus cultures were exposed to spaceﬂight conditions for 5 days
within the Simbox hardware on board the Chinese spacecraft Shenzhou 8 (launched on October 31, 2011).
The Simbox incubator enabled sample cultivation at controlled temperatures (22–24C) and humidity (30–
40%) and provided 1g in-ﬂight control by means of an integrated centrifuge. In addition, this hardware
included a pump system for metabolic quenching of the samples by RNAlater injection. The ground control
experiment started with a one-day delay into the Simbox duplicate, according to the position in the ﬂight
incubator and kept at 23C (Fengler et al., 2015) (Table 4). The microarray analysis detected 298 genes with
differential expression between sample groups ﬂight space (FS) and in-ﬂight centrifugation (FC) but the dif-
ferences in expression were not statistically signiﬁcant. This result could mean that 5 days are enough for
the culture adaptation to the new situation (spaceﬂight). Thus, in order to identify processes which are spe-
ciﬁcally inﬂuenced by microgravity and could provide important information about the physiological needs
after a few days in space, overrepresented processes that were identical in the comparisons between FS
samples and two 1g controls (in-ﬂight centrifugation or FG and ground static or GS) were analyzed. Among
the genes with upregulated expression, some of them constitute the ribosomal complex within plastids,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

and some others were genes involved in electron transport chains located within mitochondria and repre-
sentative for ATP biosynthesis. Among the downregulated genes the largest group was shown to code for
HSPs. These results indicated that 5 days of exposure to microgravity did not cause detectable signiﬁcant
changes in gene expression, but caused an increased energy demand which should be taken into consid-
eration when plants will be used as part of bioregenerative supports on long duration space missions.
Finally, with the aim to separate responses to microgravity from those of non-microgravity-related space-
ﬂight conditions, genes that were signiﬁcantly altered within spaceﬂight samples (FS and FC) compared to
the 1g ground control were studied. The majority of these genes were involved in the stress-induced anti-
oxidant system, signaling chains, and defense-resistance response. The alteration of these processes was
assumed as the effect of spaceﬂight-related environmental conditions, and especially, with the high radi-
ation dose received by space samples (0.51 mSV/d), much more intense than terrestrial levels of radiation (1
to 2 mSV/a) (Fengler et al., 2015).
The aforementioned BRIC-16-DNA experiment also included the transcriptome analysis of Arabidopsis
thaliana tissue culture cells (Paul et al., 2012)(Table 4). One of the most striking molecular differences
observed was the signiﬁcant increase in expression of most heat shock proteins (HSP) and heat shock factor
(HSF) transcriptional activators genes in spaceﬂight non-differentiated tissue culture cells. Among these
genes, the HsfA2 transcription factor which is involved in the late phases of heat stress response, and
two of its targets: Hsp17.6A, that blocks protein aggregation, and Hsp101, that facilitates dissociation of
already formed protein aggregates. In addition, the expression changes in these two HSP proteins, as
markers of late stress response, were studied in parabolic ﬂights (hypergravity and hypogravity alternation),
in simulated microgravity (2D clinorotation) and in simulated hypergravity (centrifuge) by RT-qPCR. Among
gravitational conditions examined, only 2D clinorotation induced the expression of both Hsp101 and
HSP17.6A at the same levels as spaceﬂight. This fact suggests that hypergravity forces experienced at
the space shuttle launch do not contribute to the elevated level of HSP transcripts in spaceﬂight samples.
Therefore, a unique feature of microgravity engages HSPs as part of a later-phase adaptive response to
spaceﬂight conditions, probably associated with the role played by them in cytoskeletal organization, pre-
venting cytoskeletal scaffold collapse in a non-gravity environment (Zupanska et al., 2013).
The Cellular Expression Logic, or CEL BRIC-17 experiment, was a modiﬁcation of the previous Arabidopsis
cell cultures experiment in BRIC-16. In this experiment, launched on SpaceX CRS-2 to the ISS on 1 March
2013, besides the WT cell line, two mutant lines were used: ARG1 KO and HSFA2 KO (Zupanska et al., 2017,
2019). The knockout line deﬁcient in the gene encoding ARG1 was selected for the role of this protein in
gravisignaling, whereas the knockout line deﬁcient in the gene encoding HSFA2 was selected because
this protein is a key regulator of the defense response, via HSP chaperone transcriptional activation, to
several types of environmental stresses (Table 4). The transcriptome analysis, after 10 days on orbit, showed
Table 4. Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment
Conditions
Organism
Fixation
Authors
GLDS
Simbox
mg dark 5 days
Arabidpsis
thaliana (Col-0)
RNAlater (Simbox)
Fengler et al.(2015)
GLDS-213
mg dark 324h
Oryza sativa (Rice)
RNAlater (Simbox)
Jin et al., 2018
GLDS-284
BRIC
mg dark 12 days
parabolic ﬂight
simulated microgravity
(2D clinorotation)
simulated hypergravity
(centrifuge)
Arabidpsis
thaliana(Col-0)
RNAlater (PDFU)
Paul et al. (2012);
Zupanska et al.(2013)
GLDS-17
mg dark 10 days
Arabidpsis thaliana
(Col-0, arg1 and hsfa2)
RNAlater
(PDFU)
Zupanska et al. (2017):
Zupanska et al., 2019
GLDS-147
GLDS-205
mg light (mid-deck)
1h, 8h and 20h
Ceratopteris
richardii spores
Gaseous
nitrogen freezer
Salmi and Roux (2008)
NA
Experiments performed in different hardware, indicating the main characteristics of each of them: experimental conditions,
genotype, ﬁxation, tissue used to carry out the transcriptomic study, authors and the GeneLab Data Set (GLDS). See also
Table S2.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
13
iScience
Review

that both mutant cell lines used substantially more and different gene expression proﬁles to achieve a
spaceﬂight-adapted state compared to WT cells. This observation led to conclude that a proﬁcient space-
ﬂight adaptation requires a functional HSF network and functional ARG1 protein. The functional gene cate-
gorization revealed that, although individual genes were different in each expression set, those genes were
largely representative of the same biological processes, suggesting slightly different routes, which ap-
peared to be utilized to converge on the same basic adaptive strategies. In addition, most of the genes
altered in expression in spaceﬂight in WT cells were found to be Arg1- and HsfA2-dependent. Speciﬁcally,
these genes were involved in cell wall remodeling, intracellular transport and starch biosynthesis, suggest-
ing major and speciﬁc roles of these two proteins in the physiological spaceﬂight adaptation through these
processes. Overall, this study showed up that the use of knockout lines greatly increases the list of genes
that are necessary to adapt to and survive in the spaceﬂight environment. This ampliﬁes the information
that is necessary to learn on what biological processes are necessary and what genes are involved in these
processes (Zupanska et al., 2017, 2019).
Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture adaptive response to simulated space environments
(Table S3)
Cell cultures of Arabidopsis thaliana were exposed to partial-g forces (0.16g, 0.38g and 0.5g) for different times
during parabolic ﬂight (24 s, 33 s and 20 s) and clinostat experiments (5 min, 10 min and 30 min), in order to
investigate gravity-dependent alterations in gene expression by whole-genome microarray analysis (Fengler
et al., 2016) (Table 5). The results revealed that, in simulation by clinorotation, the least effects (the lowest num-
ber of differentially expressed genes at least 2-fold) were obtained after 30 min at 0.5g. Furthermore, the hier-
archical clustering (Pearson‘s Correlation Coefﬁcient) suggested that, in the clinorotation experiment, gene
expression was more affected by the exposure time than by the change in gravity, because 0.16g, 0.38g and
0.5g generated no separate cluster for a given time of exposure and, interestingly, under 30 min of exposure,
all gravity levels clustered with 1g controls. Although the clustering illustrated a low similarity between real
(parabolic ﬂight) and simulated partial-g, the screening at the single gene level identiﬁed many common differ-
entially expressed genes, mainly at 0.38g. Among them, genes coding for proteins involved in cell wall mod-
iﬁcations, peroxidases, auxin-related proteins, transmembrane proteins and components of intracellular
signaling chains like different protein kinases, transcription factors and phytohormone-related proteins were
identiﬁed. Taken together this study suggests that, after 30 min of clinorotation, speciﬁc responses are fading,
demonstrating the insusceptibility of cell cultures over time and that clinorotation can induce changes in levels
of transcripts similar to ﬂight experiments (Fengler et al., 2016).
In another work, callus semi-solid cultures of A. thaliana, prepared from MM2d suspension cultures, were
exposed for 200 min to two paradigms of simulated microgravity (a mechanical one, the Random Posi-
tioning Machine (RPM) and diamagnetic levitation) and hypergravity (the Large Diameter Centrifuge
Table 5. Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture adaptive response to simulated space environments
Conditions
Organism
Fixation
Authors
GLDS
Parabolic ﬂight
2D Clinostat
0.16g, 0.38g and
0.5g dark 5min,
10min and 30min
Arabidpsis
thaliana (Col-0)
RNAlater Freeze
(liquid nitrogen)
Fengler
et al. (2016)
NA
Levitation magnet
Random Positioning
Machine (RPM)
Large Diameter
Centrifuge (LDC)
m*, 0,1g*, 1g*,
1.9g* and 2g*
mg2g dark 200min
Arabidpsis
thaliana(MM2d)
Freeze (liquid
nitrogen)
Manzano
et al. (2012)
GLDS-8
Random Positioning
Machine (RPM)
mg dark synchronous
subpopulations (enriched
in G2/M and G1
phases) asynchronous
population 14h
Arabidpsis
thaliana(MM2d)
Freeze (liquid
nitrogen)
Kamal
et al. (2019)
GLDS-144
Experiments performed in different microgravity simulators or facilities, indicating the main characteristics of each of them:
experimental conditions, genotype, and ﬁxation, tissue used to carry out the transcriptomic study, authors and the GeneLab
Data Set (GLDS). See also Table S3.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

(LDC)). Five environments with different levels of effective gravity (g) and magnetic ﬁeld (B) strengths within
a magnet (mg *B = 10.1 T, 0,1g* B = 14.7 T, 1g* B = 16.5 T, 1.9g* B = 14.7 T and 2g* B = 10.1 T) and samples
exposed to RPM simulated microgravity (mg) and hypergravity (2g) in the Large Diameter Centrifuge (LDC)
were compared (Manzano et al., 2012) (Table 5). The effects on the overall transcriptional state of callus
exposed to these altered gravitational environments were studied. Microarray analysis indicated that
barely a few genes were differentially expressed (not reaching statistical signiﬁcance) when exposed to
these unusual environments compared with internal 1g controls (particularly because of the large effect
of high-energy magnetic ﬁeld). However, using a detailed analysis based on clustering of similarly ex-
pressed genes (Gene Expression Dynamics Inspector-GEDI) it was found that gravitational and magnetic
ﬁelds had a synergistic effect on the transcriptional proﬁle because both the number of altered genes
and the GO groups affected increased when a magnetic ﬁeld gradient was applied, mainly affecting
structural, abiotic stress and secondary metabolism genes. In fact, it is the ﬁrst study in which a 0.1g partial
gravity samples show larger effects that those observed in the equivalent simulated microgravity sample
under the same environmental condition. The GEDI analysis also revealed that, there is a global signature,
speciﬁcally including abiotic stress genes, that behave in an opposite manner under micro and hypergravity
environments (Manzano et al., 2012).
Plant cell proliferation is a process known to be affected during spaceﬂight, but the molecular mechanisms
involved in these changes remain unclear. To investigate transcriptomic changes in cell cycle regulation
and progression by simulated microgravity, an Arabidopsis immobilized suspension culture was incubated
in the RPM. Particularly, the analysis was performed with two synchronous subpopulations, enriched in G2/
M and G1 phases, incubated for respectively 7 h and 14 h within the RPM, and an asynchronous reference
cell culture incubated for 14h (Kamal et al., 2019) (Table 5). The results showed that the number of differ-
entially expressed genes common in all populations by the simulated microgravity environment was low:
73 genes were upregulated, mostly being NADH/oxidative activity-related genes and mitochondria-
related functions, and 83 genes were downregulated, most of them involved in ribosome activity and in
photosynthesis-related functions. Conversely, simulated microgravity had differential effects on gene
expression through the cell cycle progression. The expression of genes related to cell cycle regulation func-
tion, cell organization, ribosome biogenesis and developmental processes were downregulated in the G2/
M population and upregulated in the G1 population, whereas abiotic stress response genes were upregu-
lated in the G2/M population and downregulated signiﬁcantly in the G1 population. Among the genes
involved in abiotic stress response, genes that respond to UV-B, heat, osmotic shock and wounding are
upregulated in synchronous G2/M population, but they were repressed in the synchronous G1 culture after
14 h of incubation in the RPM. These differential patterns of gene expression of stress pathways suggest
differential sensitivity to microgravity of different phases of the cell cycle. It was proposed that a rapid initial
response to a new environment within the ﬁrst 7 h occurs mainly through the activation of expression of
stress-related genes, whereas, at 14h of incubation, the gene expression patterns change as a result of a
longer-term adaptive strategy that inhibits those pathways (Kamal et al., 2019).
Adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of cell cultures from other species
Ceratopteris richardii spores were exposed to microgravity aboard NASA shuttle ﬂight STS-93 to identify
the early cellular and molecular events associated with gravity signal perception and response. These fern
single-cells have been particularly valuable for investigating how cells sense and respond to gravity
because this signal orients the polarity of their development shortly after light initiates their germination.
The spores remained dormant in darkness inside BRIC canisters until the gravity force was less than 0.001g,
and then were exposed to ambient light in the mid-deck to induce germination. After light exposure at
three developmental time points (1 h, 8 h and 20 h) spores were frozen in a gaseous nitrogen freezer
and were kept frozen until total RNA was isolated (Table 4). Microarray analysis showed that genes likely
to encode peroxidases are downregulated in spaceﬂight development whereas protein phosphatase 2C
and chaperone expression were upregulated in spores during the ﬁrst 20 h of their germination in micro-
gravity. Moreover, genes that may be involved in mobilization of reserve lipids were upregulated in space-
ﬂight and genes whose products are likely involved in lipid hydrolysis/synthesis/transfer showed reduced
mRNA levels during development in microgravity. These results, taken together, suggest that in micro-
gravity lipids utilization and stress response changes occur in ferns and may be common features of
spaceﬂight response in plant cells. Moreover, these ﬁndings provided new insights into early physiological
responses to microgravity and are valuable data unraveling the basis genetic mechanisms that drive single-
cell gravity responses (Salmi and Roux, 2008).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
15
iScience
Review

The spaceship Shenzhou mission also included one experiment to study gene expression in rice calli in
response to microgravity. Rice calli (Oryza sativa) were loaded onto the stationary and rotating platforms
of Simbox incubator and were ﬁxed in RNAlater in space after 324h (13,5 days) spacecraft ﬂight (Table 4).
The functional analysis identiﬁed that the microgravity-response transcripts were associated with meta-
bolism and signaling pathways of hormones, transcription factors, starch, glycolysis and the electron chain,
protein degradation, transporters and cell wall metabolism. Among cell wall-related genes, genes related
to cell wall formation/degradation were downregulated and transcripts corresponded to proteins involved
in primary cell wall modiﬁcation were upregulated. In addition, genes of the aquaporin family (water chan-
nels) were upregulated in spaceﬂight environment. The changed levels of these cell wall loosening and cell
wall precursor synthesis-related genes together with aquaporin genes may establish of a new balance be-
tween cell wall rigidity and cell turgor pressure under microgravity conditions. Therefore, cell wall relaxa-
tion and extension may be regarded as microgravity plants adaptation (Jin et al., 2018).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In the last decade, the landscape of plant biology research in spaceﬂight and simulated microgravity
research has greatly advanced, mostly with the incorporation of space transcriptomics tools such as RNA-
seq and microarrays. The aim of this review was therefore to revise the knowledge acquired through these
techniques. The focus and organization of the work around the hardware used in the various experiments
facilitated the comparison of the numerous results obtained and made it possible the identiﬁcation of gene
expression networks leading to a better knowledge of the plant adaptation mechanisms to spaceﬂight con-
ditions. The report also highlighted the European contribution in the acquisition of this knowledge.
Even considering that novel experimental approaches take more time to be incorporated to space research
than to general life science research on ground because of obvious and speciﬁc constraints of spaceﬂight
experiments, these technologies have provided more than 25 datasets deposited in GeneLab database
(Tables S1, S2 y S3). In that regard, Figure 1 illustrates the type of studies performed at the international
level, arranged according to the materials and facilities used. The European contribution to the global
plant biology experimentation is modest in the global numbers (8 of 30 studies) but particular contributions
have been made in key topics. An example is the European co-leadership of the largest plant experiment
carried out on board the ISS, using the most sophisticated hardware, that is the EMCS, including lighting at
different wavelengths, partial-g and 1g, and environmental controls (Herranz et al., 2019; Vandenbrink
et al., 2019; Villacampa et al., 2021). Also, there is a key contribution of European teams in simulated micro-
gravity facilities and the use of cell cultures to uncover fundamental mechanisms discriminating the profes-
sional response to the lack of gravity from the purely cellular response and adaptive mechanisms. It is
particularly relevant to realize that a small number of cell-based studies in simulators may have contributed
to our understanding of these mechanisms more signiﬁcantly than some spaceﬂight missions.
There is a clear dominance by number of studies in the use of BRIC hardware by NASA researchers (20% of
the studies). This experimental hardware facilitates a large number of experiments to be quickly performed
in orbit, but it shows serious limitations as to the environmental conditions that can be controlled and moni-
tored. Indeed, the absence of a 1g control in space does not allow to discriminate between alterations
caused by microgravity and other environmental factors such as hypoxia or a reduced conﬁned space,
which does not allow the cultivation of plants in good conditions over a period of time longer than a few
days. For example, in the BRIC-16 experiments, the cytoskeleton was clearly shown to have a key role in
the response of plants to spaceﬂight stresses, but it was not clear whether this response was a consequence
of adaptation to the absence of gravity, or to another environmental factor independent of microgravity,
such as hypoxia (Kwon et al., 2015). Other facilities with better control of the environmental conditions
(ABRS and VPS/VEGGIE), particularly those including a 1g control on board (EMCS and Simbox harware),
lead to more sophisticated results. In fact, the presence of a centrifuge on board not only makes it possible
to obtain 1g control in space, and thus to discriminate the responses of plants because of the absence of
gravity from other environmental factors, but it also makes it possible to obtain partial gravity levels such as
that of the Moon (0.18g) and that of Mars (0.36g), which is essential for preparing future missions to the
Moon and Mars. Improvements in cultivation constraints, optimization of controls and the systematic
use of the model plant A. thaliana have allowed a great advance in the acquisition and comparison of re-
sults. It should be noted, however, that restoring terrestrial gravity or partial gravity such as that of Mars or
the Moon on a centrifuge may induce experimental biases that have not yet been evaluated at the cellular
scale. For example, the rotation may introduce vibrations to which the cells may respond independently of
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
17
iScience
Review

the level of gravity and the centrifugal forces are not applied homogeneously on a culture surface, but
rather they are applied according to a gradient that is deﬁned from the axis of rotation, which may be a
source of some heterogeneity in the study population.
Despite the limitations in interpreting the results because of different experimental constraints, our knowl-
edge of the adaptive response to spaceﬂight environment of A. thaliana seedlings has unequivocally
advanced. Transcriptomic analysis techniques (RNAseq and microarray) as well as the consensual use of
the model species A. thaliana allowed us to highlight common response pathways in the majority of the
experiments carried out on board the ISS. Thus, the main processes affected identiﬁed in these studies
were cell wall remodeling, oxidative stress, defense reaction, HSPs, and photosynthesis.
Consequently, we are in conditions of identifying some mechanisms of adaptation of plants to micro-
gravity, based on similar gene expression proﬁles obtained in different experiments (Figure 2). The
absence of gravity is perceived by the plant as a stress factor, which will trigger a whole series of adaptation
reactions of the plant to this new environmental factor. Some of these reactions seem to be speciﬁcally tar-
geted in the maintenance of cell integrity, such as cell wall remodeling, whereas others affect plant
metabolism, such as photosynthesis, the electron transfer chain in mitochondria, and the communication
between nuclei, plastids, and mitochondria. Finally, other reactions are systematically triggered by many
biotic and abiotic stresses, such as oxidative stress, defense reactions and HSPs (chaperone proteins).
Although the link between all responses has yet to be determined, it is clear that all of them play an essen-
tial role in the adaptation of plants to the space environment, becoming key targets for optimal growth
plants to support future long-term spaceﬂight missions. (Figure 3).
Other molecular processes involved in the response to different environmental stress factors on Earth,
such as DNA methylation and alternative splicing, seem to be also involved in this adaptation response,
as the ﬁrst transcriptomics studies of these two processes have revealed (Beisel et al., 2019; Paul et al.,
2021; Xu et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2019). However, different responses or even contradictory results de-
pending on the environmental conditions have also been found between the different experiments
(Johnson et al., 2017), strongly suggesting that the adaptive mechanisms, as a whole, should be more
complex than these observed responses alone. In fact, the large number of different ecotypes and mu-
tants used in the different experiments have shown that the response between the Arabidopsis ecotypes
used is very different, some of them showing a greater capacity to adapt to the space environment or
with less cost by changing the expression of a low number of genes, as it happens to Ler. (Choi et al.,
2019; Paul et al., 2017). The mutant lines in different genes involved in various processes such as skewing,
DNA methylation and UPR (Angelos et al., 2021; Califar et al., 2020; Paul et al., 2021) have provided more
detailed information about the role that these processes play in the adaptation of plants to a space ﬂight
environment. In addition, differences between the genes whose expression is altered have been found
between the different organs of the plant (Paul et al., 2013). Both ﬁndings indicate that the genetic back-
ground is an aspect to take into account to choice of the most suitable crop plant models and that
knowing the integrated response of all parts of the plant will be crucial for the next phase of spaceﬂight
experimentation.
Light, as the results of the different experiments demonstrate, is an essential factor in all plant development
stages under spaceﬂight environment. The light quality, and speciﬁcally red light in the early stages of
development (seedlings), modulates the expression of genes involved in related-stress pathways to
cope with environmental spaceﬂight conditions (Villacampa et al., 2021). In addition, the day length is a fac-
tor that can regulate the plants ﬂowering time, and it is even possible to use a genetic switch to induce ﬂow-
ering by adding a treatment, such as a heat shock (Wang et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2022). Furthermore, it has
been shown that the adaptive response of plants depends on both the level of gravity (Herranz et al., 2019;
Sheppard et al., 2021)) and the time of exposure to the spatial environment (Fengler et al., 2015; Kamal
et al., 2019)). In fact, an early and a late response can be identiﬁed in the adaptive response of plant cell
Figure 1. Distribution of Plant Space Omics contributions submitted to the GeneLab database
Most European contributions (in bold) have been done using cell culture experiments in simulated microgravity facilities (10% of the experiments) and the
European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS) into the ISS (17% of the experiments). Other facilities frequently used in spaceﬂight experiments are the
Biological Research in Canisters (BRIC) hardware and the VPS-VEGGIE cultivation chamber. At the top and the bottom part of the ﬁgure, images of some of
the different facilities used are shown. From left to right and from top to bottom: Random Positioning Machine (credit ESA), Magnetic Levitation Instrument
(credit Nottingham University) BRIC (credit NASA), Large Diameter Centrifuge (credit ESA), EMCS (credit ESA/NASA) and VEGGIE (credit NASA).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
18
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

cultures grown in simulated microgravity (Kamal et al., 2019). ROS production was also demonstrated in
other members of the Brassicaceae family, such as Mizuma (Brassica rapa) and parietal changes were
observed in rice (Oryza sativa), conﬁrming the key role of these two cellular processes in the adaptation pro-
cesses of plants to microgravity.
Finally, we consider it necessary to recapitulate why this research is actually important and worth to be
performed. As previously indicated, studying the adaptation of plants to the space environment is an
essential step towards successfully integrating plants into life support systems. During spaceﬂight, plants
will have to adapt to a new environment where factors such as micro- and mini-gravity (gravities of space-
ﬂight, the Moon and Mars) and chronic low-level cosmic radiation are completely new to them. In that
regard, experiments introducing partial gravity levels, and particularly the levels around the Moon grav-
ity, are becoming mandatory. A potential risk in using low gravity levels (circa 0.1g) with more deleterious
effects than microgravity itself have been revealed (Herranz et al., 2019; Manzano et al., 2018), and the
decommissioning of EMCS in 2018 from the ISS made us less able to provide new experiments at those
conditions.
In this ﬁeld, transcriptomic studies are a privileged strategy because they allow an analysis of gene expres-
sion in its entirety, leading to the identiﬁcation of response pathways that would not be detected by more
targeted approaches (Lowe et al., 2017). They also have the advantage of requiring only a relatively small
quantity of transcripts (1 ng of total RNA for RNAseq and 1 mg of mRNA for microarray), which is a major
advantage in the context of space experiments where the quantity of biological material is always very
limited. In contrast, there are two potential caveats to the advance of the research ﬁeld. The ﬁrst is the un-
even distribution of spaceﬂight opportunities in space agencies, particularly the unavailability of ESA to
provide a replacement with similar capabilities to EMCS. The second is the analysis and integration of re-
sults from so different experiment platforms, materials and designs. New international consortia have been
created to cope with better tools for transcriptomic analyses, improvement to the access of datasets and
metadata, contributing decisively to the optimization of the new experiments to be conducted in the near
future. GeneLab (Overbey et al., 2021), TOAST (Barker et al., 2020), ESA Space Omics TT (Madrigal et al.,
2020) and ISSOP (Rutter et al., 2020) are highly relevant initiatives in this direction.
Figure 2. The main spaceﬂight-related genes
Transcriptomic analyses of the numerous space experiments have so far identiﬁed a set of genes whose expression is altered by the spaceﬂight environment
in a similar way among the different experiments. The genes were grouped according to the function of their proteins. (N) nucleus, (P) plastid,
(M) mitochondria, (PR protein) pathogenesis related protein, (ROS) reactive oxygen species, (HSF) heat shock factor, (HSP) heat shock protein.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
19
iScience
Review

Limitations of the study
The transcriptomic studies included in this review focus on the search carried out mainly in GeneLab Data
Repository and despite the fact that the GLDS data set includes an interface to search datasets on key re-
positories (NIH GEO, EBI PRIDE, and ANLMG-RAST), some work focused on transcriptomic changes pro-
duced by a space environment might not have been included.
Methods details
To locate the works that study the plants adaptive response to a real or simulated space environment through
transcriptomic analysis, NASA GeneLab data repository has been used as a reference (https://genelab.nasa.
gov/). To perform an exhaustive search, the word ‘plants’ was used as a ﬁlter in the search data box and the
total results were checked one by one to conﬁrm that the publication includes and meets the criteria. In addi-
tion, to search for works not included in this database a manual search was carried out, in the Web of Science,
Google Scholar and PMC-NIH using as key search terms ‘plants spaceﬂight’/ ‘plants simulated microgravity’
together with ‘RNA sequencing ‘, ‘microarray’, ‘transcriptomic’, ‘epigenomics’, and ‘alternative splicing’.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.104687.
Figure 3. Proposed model of the microgravity adaptation mechanism in Arabidopsis thaliana
Microgravity is perceived by the plant as an abiotic stress factor which activates the production of ROS. The signal, which is perceived at the plasma
membrane, is then transmitted via Ca2+, MAPKs and phytohormones (auxin) to the nucleus where it triggers TFs like HSF. The TFs then regulate the
expression of a set of genes that trigger molecular, cellular and physiological responses, leading to the establishment of the plant adaptation to the
spaceﬂight environment. (ROS) reactive oxygen species, (TFs) transcription factors, (HSF) heat shock factor, (HSP) heat shock protein.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
20
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
All listed authors are members of the ESA Space Omics Topical Team, funded by the ESA grant/contract
4000131202/20/NL/PG/pt ‘‘Space Omics: Towards an integrated ESA/NASA–omics database for space-
ﬂight and ground facilities experiments’’ awarded to RH. Individual authors also acknowledge support
from: the French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales grant DAR 2020–4800001004, 2021–4800001117 to
ECD; the Spanish Plan Estatal de Investigacio´ n Cientı´ﬁca y Desarrollo Tecnolo´ gico (Agencia Estatal de In-
vestigacio´ n, Ministry of Science and Innovation) grant RTI2018-099309-B-I00 to FJM, including a a contract
of the Spanish National Program for Young Researchers Training to AM.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization and Investigation, AM; Writing-Original draft, AM and FJM; Writing-Review and Editing,
AM, ECD, RH and FJM; Visualization, AM, ECD and RH; Funding Acquisition, ECD, RH and FJM.
DECLARATION OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
Angelos, E., Ko, D.K., Zemelis-Durfee, S., and
Brandizzi, F. (2021). Relevance of the unfolded
protein response to spaceﬂight-induced
transcriptional reprogramming in arabidopsis.
Astrobiology 21, 367–380. https://doi.org/10.
1089/ast.2020.2313.
Barker, R., Lombardino, J., Rasmussen, K., and
Gilroy, S. (2020). Test of arabidopsis space
transcriptome: a Discovery environment to
explore multiple plant biology spaceﬂight
experiments. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 147. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpls.2020.00147.
Basu, P., Kruse, C.P., Luesse, D.R., and Wyatt, S.E.
(2017). Growth in spaceﬂight hardware results in
alterations to the transcriptome and proteome.
Life Sci. Sp. Res. 15, 88–96. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.lssr.2017.09.001.
Beisel, N.S., Noble, J., Barbazuk, W.B., Paul, A.L.,
and Ferl, R.J. (2019). Spaceﬂight-induced
alternative splicing during seedling development
in Arabidopsis thaliana. npj Microgravity 5, 9.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-019-0070-7.
Bo¨ hmer, M., and Schleiff, E. (2019). Microgravity
research in plants: a range of platforms and
options allow research on plants in zero or low
gravity that can yield important insights into plant
physiology. EMBO Rep. 20, e48541. https://doi.
org/10.15252/embr.201948541.
Califar, B., Sng, N.J., Zupanska, A., Paul, A.L., and
Ferl, R.J. (2020). Root skewing-associated genes
impact the spaceﬂight response of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 239. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpls.2020.00239.
Choi, W.G., Barker, R.J., Kim, S.H., Swanson, S.J.,
and Gilroy, S. (2019). Variation in the
transcriptome of different ecotypes of
Arabidopsis thaliana reveals signatures of
oxidative stress in plant responses to spaceﬂight.
Am. J. Bot. 106, 123–136. https://doi.org/10.
1002/ajb2.1223.
Correll, M.J., Pyle, T.P., Millar, K.D.L., Sun, Y., Yao,
J., Edelmann, R.E., and Kiss, J.Z. (2013).
Transcriptome analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana
seedlings grown in space: implications for
gravity-responsive genes. Planta 238, 519–533.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-013-1909-x.
Des Marais, D.J., Nuth, J.A., Allamandola, L.J.,
Boss, A.P., Farmer, J.D., Hoehler, T.M., Jakosky,
B.M., Meadows, V.S., Pohorille, A., Runnegar, B.,
and Spormann, A.M. (2008). The NASA
astrobiology roadmap. Astrobiology 8, 715–730.
https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2008.0819.
Fengler, S., Spirer, I., Neef, M., Ecke, M.,
Hauslage, J., and Hampp, R. (2016). Changes in
gene expression of arabidopsis thaliana cell
cultures upon exposure to real and simulated
partial-g forces. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 28,
319–329. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12217-015-
9452-y.
Fengler, S., Spirer, I., Neef, M., Ecke, M., Nieselt,
K., and Hampp, R. (2015). A whole-genome
microarray study of arabidopsis thaliana
semisolid callus cultures exposed to microgravity
and nonmicrogravity related spaceﬂight
conditions for 5 days on board of Shenzhou 8.
BioMed Res. Int. 2015, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.
1155/2015/547495.
Ferl, R.J., and Paul, A.-L. (2016). The effect of
spaceﬂight on the gravity-sensing auxin gradient
of roots: GFP reporter gene microscopy on orbit.
NPJ Microgravity 2, 15023. https://doi.org/10.
1038/npjmgrav.2015.23.
Francis, D. (2011). A commentary on the G2/M
transition of the plant cell cycle. Ann. Bot. 107,
1065–1070. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcr055.
Fu, Y., Li, L., Xie, B., Dong, C., Wang, M., Jia, B.,
Shao, L., Dong, Y., Deng, S., Liu, H., et al. (2016).
How to establish a bioregenerative life support
system for long-term crewed missions to the
moon or mars. Astrobiology 16, 925–936. https://
doi.org/10.1089/ast.2016.1477.
Herranz, R., Vandenbrink, J.P., Villacampa, A.,
Manzano, A., Poehlman, W.L., Feltus, F.A., Kiss,
J.Z., and Medina, F.J. (2019). RNAseq analysis of
the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to fractional
gravity under blue-light stimulation during
spaceﬂight. Front. Plant Sci. 10, 1529. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01529.
Jin, J., Chen, H., and Cai, W. (2018).
Transcriptomic analysis reveals the effects of
microgravity on rice calli on board the Chinese
spaceship Shenzhou 8. Microgravity Sci. Technol.
30, 807–816. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12217-018-
9633-6.
Johnson, C.M., Subramanian, A., Pattathil, S.,
Correll, M.J., and Kiss, J.Z. (2017). Comparative
transcriptomics indicate changes in cell wall
organization and stress response in seedlings
during spaceﬂight. Am. J. Bot. 104, 1219–1231.
https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1700079.
Kamal, K.Y., van Loon, J.J., Medina, F.J., and
Herranz, R. (2019). Differential transcriptional
proﬁle through cell cycle progression in
Arabidopsis cultures under simulated
microgravity. Genomics 111, 1956–1965. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2019.01.007.
Kiss, J.Z., Millar, K.D.L., and Edelmann, R.E.
(2012). Phototropism of Arabidopsis thaliana in
microgravity and fractional gravity on the
international space station. Planta 236, 635–645.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-012-1633-y.
Kruse, C.P.S., Basu, P., Luesse, D.R., and Wyatt,
S.E. (2017). Transcriptome and proteome
responses in RNAlater preserved tissue of
Arabidopsis thaliana. PLoS One 12, e0175943.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175943.
Kruse, C.P.S., Meyers, A.D., Basu, P., Hutchinson,
S., Luesse, D.R., and Wyatt, S.E. (2020).
Spaceﬂight induces novel regulatory responses in
Arabidopsis seedling as revealed by combined
proteomic and transcriptomic analyses. BMC
Plant Biol. 20, 237. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12870-020-02392-6.
Kwon, T., Sparks, J.A., Nakashima, J., Allen, S.N.,
Tang, Y., and Blancaﬂor, E.B. (2015).
Transcriptional response of arabidopsis
seedlings during spaceﬂight reveals peroxidase
and cell wall remodeling genes associated with
root hair development. Am. J. Bot. 102, 21–35.
https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1400458.
Lowe, R., Shirley, N., Bleackley, M., Dolan, S., and
Shafee, T. (2017). Transcriptomics technologies.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005457. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005457.
Lukens, L.N., and Zhan, S. (2007). The plant
genome’s methylation status and response to
stress: implications for plant improvement. Curr.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
21
iScience
Review

Opin. Plant Biol. 10, 317–322. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pbi.2007.04.012.
Madrigal, P., Gabel, A., Villacampa, A., Manzano,
A., Deane, C.S., Bezdan, D., Carnero-Diaz, E.,
Medina, F.J., Hardiman, G., Grosse, I., et al.
(2020). Revamping space-omics in europe. Cell
Syst. 11, 555–556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.
2020.10.006.
Manzano, A., Herranz, R., Toom, L.A.D., Slaa, S.,
Borst, G., Visser, M., and Medina, F.J. (2018).
Novel Moon and Mars, partial gravity simulation
paradigms and their effects on the balance
between cell growth and cell proliferation
during early plant development. npj
Microgravity 4, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41526-018-0041-4.
Manzano, A., Villacampa, A., Sa´ez-Va´squez, J.,
Kiss, J.Z., Medina, F.J., and Herranz, R. (2020). The
importance of Earth reference controls in
spaceﬂight -omics research: characterization of
nucleolin mutants from the seedling growth
experiments. iScience 23, 101686. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101686.
Manzano, A.I., van Loon, J.J., Christianen, P.C.,
Gonzalez-Rubio, J.M., Medina, F.J., and Herranz,
R. (2012). Gravitational and magnetic ﬁeld
variations synergize to cause subtle variations in
the global transcriptional state of Arabidopsis
in vitro callus cultures. BMC Genom. 13, 105.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-13-105.
Medina, F.J., Manzano, A., Kamal, K.Y., Ciska, M.,
and Herranz, R. (2021). Plants in space: novel
physiological challenges and adaptation
mechanisms. In Progress in Botany (Springer),
pp. 1–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/124_2021_53.
Overbey, E.G., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Zhang, Z.,
Rathi, K.S., Fogle, H., da Silveira, W.A., Barker,
R.J., Bass, J.J., Beheshti, A., Berrios, D.C., et al.
(2021). NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus
pipeline: standardized processing of short-read
RNA-seq data. iScience 24, 102361. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361.
Paul, A.-L., Haveman, N., Califar, B., and Ferl, R.J.
(2021). Epigenomic regulators elongator
complex subunit 2 and methyltransferase 1
differentially condition the spaceﬂight response
in arabidopsis. Front. Plant Sci. 12, 691790.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2021.691790.
Paul, A.L., Sng, N.J., Zupanska, A.K.,
Krishnamurthy, A., Schultz, E.R., and Ferl, R.J.
(2017). Genetic dissection of the Arabidopsis
spaceﬂight transcriptome: are some responses
dispensable for the physiological adaptation of
plants to spaceﬂight? PLoS One 12, e0180186.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0180186.
Paul, A.L., Zupanska, A.K., Ostrow, D.T., Zhang,
Y., Sun, Y., Li, J.L., Shanker, S., Farmerie, W.G.,
Amalﬁtano, C.E., and Ferl, R.J. (2012). Spaceﬂight
transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel
environment. Astrobiology 12, 40–56. https://doi.
org/10.1089/ast.2011.0696.
Paul, A.-L., Zupanska, A.K., Schultz, E.R., and Ferl,
R.J. (2013). Organ-speciﬁc remodeling of the
Arabidopsis transcriptome in response to
spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol. 13, 112. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2229-13-112.
Ray, S., Gebre, S., Fogle, H., Berrios, D.C., Tran,
P.B., Galazka, J.M., and Costes, S.V. (2019).
GeneLab: omics database for spaceﬂight
experiments. Bioinformatics 35, 1753–1759.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty884.
Rutter, L., Barker, R., Bezdan, D., Cope, H.,
Costes, S.V., Degoricija, L., Fisch, K.M., Gabitto,
M.I., Gebre, S., Giacomello, S., et al. (2020). A new
era for space life science: international standards
for space omics processing. Patterns 1, 100148.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2020.100148.
Salmi, M.L., and Roux, S.J. (2008). Gene
expression changes induced by space ﬂight in
single-cells of the fern Ceratopteris richardii.
Planta 229, 151–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00425-008-0817-y.
Sheppard, J., Land, E.S., Toennisson, T.A.,
Doherty, C.J., and Perera, I.Y. (2021). Uncovering
transcriptional responses to fractional gravity in
arabidopsis roots. Life 11, 1010. https://doi.org/
10.3390/life11101010.
Sugimoto, M., Oono, Y., Gusev, O., Matsumoto,
T., Yazawa, T., Levinskikh, M.A., Sychev, V.N.,
Bingham, G.E., Wheeler, R., and Hummerick, M.
(2014). Genome-wide expression analysis of
reactive oxygen species gene network in Mizuna
plants grown in long-term spaceﬂight. BMC
Plant Biol. 14, 4. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2229-14-4.
Vandenbrink, J.P., Herranz, R., Poehlman, W.L.,
Alex Feltus, F., Villacampa, A., Ciska, M., Javier
Medina, F., and Kiss, J.Z. (2019). RNA-seq
analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after
exposure to blue-light phototropic stimuli in
microgravity. Am. J. Bot. 106, 1466–1476. https://
doi.org/10.1002/ajb2.1384.
Vandenbrink, J.P., and Kiss, J.Z. (2016). Space, the
ﬁnal Frontier: a critical review of recent
experiments performed in microgravity. Plant Sci.
243, 115–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plantsci.
2015.11.004.
Villacampa, A., Ciska, M., Manzano, A.,
Vandenbrink, J.P., Kiss, J.Z., Herranz, R., and
Medina, F.J. (2021). From spaceﬂight to MARS
G-levels: adaptive response of a. thaliana seed-
lings in a reduced gravity environment is
enhanced by red-light photostimulation. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 22, 899. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms22020899.
Wang, L., Xie, J., Mou, C., Jiao, Y., Dou, Y., and
Zheng, H. (2022). Transcriptomic analysis of the
interaction between FLOWERING LOCUS T in-
duction and photoperiodic signaling in response
to spaceﬂight. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 813246.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2021.813246.
Wang, X., Wang, H., Wang, J., Sun, R., Wu, J., Liu,
S., Bai, Y., Mun, J.H., Bancroft, I., Cheng, F., et al.
(2011). The genome of the mesopolyploid crop
species Brassica rapa. Nat. Genet. 43, 1035–1039.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.919.
Xie, J., Wang, L., and Zheng, H. (2022). Molecular
basis to integrate microgravity signals into the
photoperiodic ﬂowering pathway in arabidopsis
thaliana under spaceﬂight condition. Int. J. Mol.
Sci. 23, 63. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23010063.
Xu, P., Chen, H., Jin, J., and Cai, W. (2018). Single-
base resolution methylome analysis shows
epigenetic changes in Arabidopsis seedlings
exposed to microgravity spaceﬂight conditions
on board the SJ-10 recoverable satellite. npj
Microgravity 4, 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41526-018-0046-z.
Yang, P., Wen, Q., Yu, R., Han, X., Deng, X.W., and
Chen, H. (2020). Light modulates the gravitropic
responses through organ-speciﬁc PIFs and HY5
regulation of LAZY4 expression in Arabidopsis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 18840–18848.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2005871117.
Zabel, P., Bamsey, M., Schubert, D., and Tajmar,
M. (2016). Review and analysis of over 40 years of
space plant growth systems. Life Sci. Sp. Res. 10,
1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2016.06.004.
Zhou, M., Sng, N.J., Lefrois, C.E., Paul, A.L., and
Ferl, R.J. (2019). Epigenomics in an extraterrestrial
environment: organ-speciﬁc alteration of DNA
methylation and gene expression elicited by
spaceﬂight in Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Genom.
20, 205. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-019-
5554-z.
Zupanska, A.K., Denison, F.C., Ferl, R.J., and Paul,
A.L. (2013). Spaceﬂight engages heat shock
protein and other molecular chaperone genes in
tissue culture cells of Arabidopsis Thaliana. Am. J.
Bot. 100, 235–248. https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.
1200343.
Zupanska, A.K., Lefrois, C., Ferl, R., and Paul, A.L.
(2019). HSFA2 functions in the physiological
adaptation of undifferentiated plant cells to
spaceﬂight. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 390. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijms20020390.
Zupanska, A.K., Schultz, E.R., Yao, J., Sng, N.J.,
Zhou, M., Callaham, J.B., Ferl, R.J., and Paul, A.L.
(2017). ARG1 functions in the physiological
adaptation of undifferentiated plant cells to
spaceﬂight. Astrobiology 17, 1077–1111. https://
doi.org/10.1089/ast.2016.1538.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
22
iScience 25, 104687, August 19, 2022
iScience
Review
