Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Protective alleles and precision healthcare in
crewed spaceﬂight
Lindsay A. Rutter
1,2,20, Matthew J. MacKay3,4,5, Henry Cope
6,
Nathaniel J. Szewczyk
6,7, JangKeun Kim
3,4, Eliah Overbey
3,4,
Braden T. Tierney
3,4, Masafumi Muratani
1,2, Ben Lamm8,
Daniela Bezdan
9,10,11, Amber M. Paul12, Michael A. Schmidt13,14
,
George M. Church
15,16,17
, Stefania Giacomello
18
&
Christopher E. Mason
3,4,5,17,19
Common and rare alleles are now being annotated across millions of human
genomes, and omics technologies are increasingly being used to develop
health and treatment recommendations. However, these alleles have not yet
been systematically characterized relative to aerospace medicine. Here, we
review published alleles naturally found in human cohorts that have a likely
protective effect, which is linked to decreased cancer risk and improved bone,
muscular, and cardiovascular health. Although some technical and ethical
challenges remain, research into these protective mechanisms could translate
into improved nutrition, exercise, and health recommendations for crew
members during deep space missions.
Humankind has entered a new chapter of deep space exploration, with
numerous institutions worldwide publicly aspiring toward a sustain-
able human presence on the Moon and Mars, which is also broadening
the diversity of humans in space. In the past two years, the ﬁrst person
with a prosthetic leg entered space (Inspiration4), and the ﬁrst person
with a physical disability was selected for professional astronaut
training by the European Space Agency (ESA). The next few years of
spaceﬂight also feature planned missions to the circumlunar environ-
ment after a half-century hiatus, including the ﬁrst crewed commercial
lunar ﬂyby (a team of artists and civilians for the dearMoon project),
further broadening the range of people going into space. Moreover,
while a steady increase in female space explorers began in 1982, the
ﬁrst mission to land the ﬁrst woman and person of color on the Moon
will ﬁnally occur in the Artemis III mission (Fig. 1A), coincident with a
broadening of the age ranges (Fig. 1B) and mission durations (Fig. 1C)
of the astronauts.
Of note, only 24 humans have voyaged into the more hazardous
conditions outside low-Earth orbit (LEO), all during the Apollo
program. The longest Apollo mission lasted only 12 days, and all
adventurers were white men between ages 35 and 47, all of whom
Received: 17 January 2023
Accepted: 5 June 2024
Check for updates
1Transborder Medical Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. 2Department of Genome Biology, Institute of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. 3Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 4The HRH Prince Alwaleed
Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA. 5The WorldQuant Initiative for
Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 6School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham DE22 3DT, UK. 7Ohio
Musculoskeletal and Neurological Institute (OMNI), Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA. 8Colossal Bios-
ciences, 1401 Lavaca St, Unit #155 Austin, Austin, TX 78701, USA. 9Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany. 10NGS Competence Center Tübingen (NCCT), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 11Yuri GmbH, Meckenbeuren, Germany.
12Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Department of Human Factors and Behavioral Neurobiology, Daytona Beach, FL 32114, USA. 13Sovaris Aerospace,
Boulder, CO 80302, USA. 14Advanced Pattern Analysis & Human Performance Group, Boulder, CO 80302, USA. 15GC Therapeutics Inc, Cambridge, MA 02139,
USA. 16Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 17Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02115, USA. 18SciLifeLab, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 17165, Sweden. 19The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute,
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 20Present address: School of Chemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
e-mail: mschmidtphd@patternanalysis.org; gc@hms.harvard.edu; stefania.giacomello@scilifelab.se; chm2042@med.cornell.edu
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

had passed rigorous physical ﬁtness tests. Consequently, the
objective of sending humankind to unexplored horizons over
unmatched timescales evokes critical questions about how the
human body will respond to new extremes, as well as how to best
protect the health of the broader space-faring population. In the
coming decades, public and professional space explorers will likely
embark on multi-year missions to the Moon and Mars, and this can
lead to a more equitable vision of crewed space exploration. Spe-
ciﬁcally, the space community can democratize vital aspects of
spaceﬂight, ranging from tailored space suit designs, precision
health
recommendations, and
customized
countermeasures1,2.
Risks for these crews include radiation-induced cancers, space-
induced osteopenia, challenges with pregnancy and child devel-
opment, and changes for human bodies in Martian- and Lunar-based
communities.
The same motivations that drive precision healthcare on Earth
could be useful for these new populations in space, where molecular
data could be employed to guide therapy and mission recommen-
dations. Multipronged countermeasures that are both environmental
(such as advanced spacesuits, spacecrafts, and space habitats)
and biomedical (such as omics-based nutrition, exercise, and lifestyle
recommendations)
likely
represent
the
best
contenders
to
optimize health across a more inclusive gamut of humanity in space.
In this paper, we highlight omics technologies as one potential
component toward improving prospective health countermeasures
in space2.
Omics modeling tools assess multiple biological responses
(including
genomics,
epigenomics,
transcriptomics,
epitran-
scriptomics, metagenomics, metatranscriptomics, metabolomics, and
proteomics) that can converge into useful solutions for mitigating
spaceﬂight-induced physiological deconditioning. Indeed, omics-
based recommendations can be integrated alongside other counter-
measures to sustain human health in space, and near real-time health
monitoring in space could also one day incorporate omics3. We review
an example set of published alleles that appear to be linked to health-
protective effects, with relevance both on Earth and in space. Basic
research into the protective mechanisms of such alleles may translate
into improved therapeutic compound discovery and better-informed
nutrition, exercise, and lifestyle recommendations, not only for space
explorers, but also for those who work in challenging conditions on
Earth. We conclude by discussing some of the signiﬁcant scientiﬁc and
ethical challenges related to these themes.
Results
Growing evidence indicates that spaceﬂight can elicit a range of
stressful and adaptive physiological responses on the human body.
Environmental harms like radiation, microgravity, and altered gas
composition can jeopardize the health of the musculoskeletal, cardi-
ovascular, digestive, nervous, integumentary, and immune systems;
increase the risk of cancer, diabetes, and aging traits; and disrupt
vision, sleep cycles, and cognitive behavior1. There are a range of
known
alleles
across
various
health-risk
categories
(Fig.
2,
Fig. 1 | Increasing time and breadth of astronauts. A The cumulative number of
astronauts who have been in space, plotted by the year of their ﬁrst mission.
B Boxplots representing the age of astronauts on their ﬁrst mission plotted by the
decade of their ﬁrst mission. C Boxplots representing the cumulative amount of
time an astronaut spent in space plotted against the number of missions in which
they have participated. Blue signiﬁes male and pink signiﬁes female astronauts in all
plots. Data was scraped from supercluster.com on September 20th, 2021. Only
astronauts who spent time in space and crossed the Kármán line are displayed.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
2

Supplementary Data 1) that may warrant effective and precision
countermeasures to improve the physical ﬁtness of both spaceﬂight
participants and terrestrial humans.
The human health challenges of crewed LEO, cis-lunar, and
interplanetary missions will beneﬁt from the development of coun-
termeasures for optimal crew health and safety, especially for known
genes that could confer a strong impact on spaceﬂight-related risks.
Examples of known genes relevant for spaceﬂight include those rela-
ted to altered radiation tolerance (TP53), hematopoiesis (EPOR), bone
density (LRP5), and immune function (HLA alleles and cytokines)4,
although there may be upper limits for adaptation5. As such, even
when the mechanism of a phenotype is known, natural evolution with
extant alleles may have a limited range for adaptation. Nonetheless, an
important role of omics (and other omics modeling, such as
organoids)6,7 is to understand risks and mechanisms at a deeper level,
so that traditional protective measures (such as spacesuits, exercise
equipment, and radiation shielding) can be designed in more informed
ways. As a result, comprehensive aerospace healthcare programs in
the future would likely integrate both omics information and tradi-
tional protective measures. We brieﬂy illustrate this below by focusing
on key examples of radiation-induced cancer and space-induced bone
demineralization.
Example 1: Space-induced radiation syndrome and cancer threat
Radiation exposure is one of the predominant health hazards of deep
space missions, for both in-ﬂight and long-term, post-ﬂight risks. In-
ﬂight concerns include acute radiation sickness (ARS), which may
include hair loss, cataracts, metabolic deﬁciency, and gastrointestinal
dysfunction8,9; central nervous system (CNS) disturbances that may
affect
cognitive
abilities,
motor
functions,
and
behavioral
performance10; and degeneration of radiation-sensitive immunological
tissues that could weaken the immune system11. One prominent long-
term issue is the risk of fatal cancer from radiation exposure12,13. For
context, over the course of one year, the typical human is exposed to
approximately 3 milliSieverts (mSv) on Earth versus 144 mSv on the
International Space Station (ISS)14,15, in addition to varied doses and
types of ionizing radiation (IR).
Astronauts on the ISS, which is located in LEO, are exposed to IR
but are mostly protected by Earth’s magnetosphere. In contrast, future
deep space missions outside of LEO will expose astronauts to
increased doses of radiation, with a higher ﬂux of galactic cosmic rays
(GCRs)12. For example, a single 500-day mission to Mars would likely
expose astronauts to 1000 mSv, the career limit set by international
space agencies, which corresponds to a 3% increased risk of lethality
from exposure-induced cancer16. Recent studies that incorporated
non-targeted radiation effects estimate that cancer risks from Mars
missions may be higher than previously estimated17. It is worth noting
that other celestial bodies that have been nominated for far-future
human exploration may be even more dangerous: One example is
Europa, which receives more than 5000 mSv of radiation each day,
enough to prove deadly to humans18.
Current radiation countermeasures include nutrition, drugs, and
anti-radiation spacecraft shielding, but these offer only partial
protection19,20. Moreover, there are currently no FDA-approved radio-
protectants that can be deployed for crews, although cytokine sup-
plementation therapy (Neupogen, Neulasta, and Leukine) has been
approved by the FDA for the treatment of the acute hematopoietic
syndrome. Other possible radiation countermeasures could include
radiation absorbers and nutrition (scavenger vitamins, trace elements,
and minerals) (Fig. 2)12,21. In addition, individual susceptibility to
radiation-induced cancer may be a key factor22,23, with individual dif-
ferences observed even in early studies of radiation victims24, and
radiosensitivity appears to be inﬂuenced by a variety of factors. These
factors include known susceptibility genes (such as BReast CAncer
gene (BRCA) 1 and 2 mutations), age, sex, nutrition, toxin exposure,
comorbidities, inﬂammatory state, and viral infections25. At this time,
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) predicts
individual risk for carcinogenesis based on statistics at the population
level, and genomics and other omics data could better inform these
estimates26. Such omics-based information for spaceﬂight could also
be relevant for soldiers, emergency ﬁrst responders, coal miners,
Fig. 2 | Spaceﬂight health risk countermeasures. Examples of health-risk cate-
gories that warrant precision countermeasures to improve the physical ﬁtness of
both spaceﬂight participants and terrestrial humankind. From left to right: exam-
ples of common spaceﬂight ailments related to the health-risk category; examples
of spaceﬂight countermeasures related to the health-risk category; examples of
terrestrial populations that could beneﬁt from improved precision counter-
measures related to the health-risk category. Created with BioRender.com released
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 Interna-
tional license.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
3

radiologic technicians, reactor workers, pilots, and others who enter
radioactive environments (Fig. 2)27.
Example 2: Space-induced bone demineralization
Observations within the limited setting of LEO suggest an average
bone mineral density (BMD) loss of 1–1.5% each month for weight-
bearing bones28,29. Six-month missions on the ISS reportedly induce
bone loss equivalent to two decades of aging, some of which may be
long-lasting30; this ﬁnding has implications about missions that will
last more than one year on the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. Multiyear
missions, especially ones that journey outside of LEO, are harder to
model, due to the absence of any comparable data. However, recent
models estimate astronauts may suffer 32.4–36.8% BMD loss during
missions to Mars, with up to 100% developing osteopenia, 33%
developing osteoporosis, and 79% reaching fracture risk levels that
NASA deems impermissible31. These models were developed using
astronaut data inside LEO31, which is a critical limitation; deep space
radiation is hypothesized to exacerbate the BMD loss already caused
by microgravity unloading32. For example, cancer patients routinely
experience increased bone fracture risk in areas irradiated during
treatment33. Hence, the severity of bone damage during inter-
planetary missions may be even higher, once taking into account the
factor of deep space radiation and calcium loss. Bone healing could
also be impaired due to microgravity, where sepsis and throm-
boembolic blood clots could ultimately present31. Moreover, even
though BMD loss has been shown to partially recover one year after
spaceﬂight, recovered bone appeared to be deposited into bone
architecture similar to that of older people34, indicating the recovery
is incomplete.
With several upcoming human missions into deep space (e.g.
Artemis II, III, dearMoon, and Mars missions), we will better under-
stand the nature of space-induced bone demineralization. Those
data could likely improve countermeasures and the incorporation of
exercise, pharmacology, and nutrition protocols (Fig. 2). For exam-
ple, the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) improves the
health of astronauts by reducing the magnitude of common space
health ailments, including BMD decreases35, isokinetic strength
decreases36, and immune system dysregulation37. The ARED may
confer more pronounced physiological beneﬁts than its predecessor,
the interim Resistive Exercise Device (iRED), which only offered
resistance exercise at lower quality and quantity loads. Unfortu-
nately, current exercise spaceﬂight devices may not practically be
deployed in upcoming deep space vessels due to limited cargo
volume. As such, ﬂight exercise hardware may need to be scaled
down for compatibility, and the feasibility of next-generation min-
iaturized equipment (such as the Miniature Exercise Device-2 (MED-
2)) is currently being assessed38.
Vitamin D is another key mediator of bone health through calcium
absorption and bone mineralization, and represents a relevant target
for upcoming missions. Prior to 2006, crews supplemented with ~400
International Units (IU) of vitamin D each day during 3–6 months
missions still showed decreases in vitamin D status postﬂight39. When
ground-based studies in Antarctica and Johnson Space Center veriﬁed
that daily vitamin D doses of 800–2000 IU were safe and could
maintain vitamin D status for 3–6 months in settings devoid of ultra-
violet (UV) light exposure, vitamin D supplementation recommenda-
tions for space crew in similar missions were increased in 2006 from
daily doses of 400 to 800 IU40. Despite such evidence-based
improvements in dietary and exercise countermeasures, BMD loss
remains an unsolved health hazard in spaceﬂight that will likely be
more problematic for future long-term missions. Here again, omics
data analysis could potentially further discover and improve coun-
termeasures. While current equations that predict BMD loss consider
population-level differences with factors of ethnicity, sex, and age31,
research suggests that genetics may account for 60–80% of bone mass
variability, and protective genes like LRP5 can help guide risk for
astronauts. Naturally, any valuable omics-based countermeasures
developed for bone health in space could spur innovations that beneﬁt
populations on Earth who suffer from bone loss, including the elderly,
postmenopausal people, people with osteoporosis, and cancer
patients who endure incidental bone loss after radiation treat-
ment (Fig. 2).
Studying omics for improved spaceﬂight safety
Of note, there are some published alleles (Fig. 3) that occur naturally in
human populations, and which have been linked to protective
mechanisms with possible relevance to spaceﬂight healthcare, which
could help guide the countermeasure examples described above. The
protective effects of some of these alleles appear to mechanistically
overlap with nutrition and exercise interventions, and have motivated
new clinical trials (Fig. 3). Hence, basic scientiﬁc research into the
protective mechanisms of these alleles could one day translate into
improved therapeutic compound discovery and better-informed
nutrition, exercise, and lifestyle recommendations for crew members
to maintain their health during deep space exploration. After review-
ing these published alleles and their promising implications, we then
follow with examples of the numerous technical and ethical difﬁculties
involved with basic scientiﬁc research into the protective mechanisms
linked to these alleles.
Human cohorts: Individuals
Researchers discovered several of the alleles (Fig. 3) with protective
mechanisms by studying special human cohorts, especially indivi-
duals with rare phenotypes. For example, a German toddler
appeared “extraordinarily muscular” and was eventually diagnosed
with a mutation in the myostatin-producing MSTN (GDF8) gene41.
The loss-of-function mutation translated into an absence of mature
myostatin for the patient, who experienced gross muscle hyper-
trophy, with quadricep muscles 7.2 standard deviations (SD) above
average and subcutaneous fat thickness 2.88 SD below the expected
mean41. MSTN targets are also being utilized in phase 2 clinical trials
of humanized monoclonal MSTN antibodies, which confer increased
muscle mass and strength in older individuals with recent falls42,
and thus could represent applications for astronauts as well.
Resistance training and creatine supplementation to decrease
myostatin serum levels have also been deployed based on individual
proﬁles43, which represent a non-omics intervention option for
spaceﬂight.
Human cohorts: Families
Several other alleles have come to light through studying families with
protective attributes. For example, genes linked to stronger bones
(LRP5) and higher oxygen transport (EPOR) have been found in several
family-based studies, and these protective pathways may be promising
for spaceﬂight healthcare (Fig. 3). Speciﬁcally, the LRP5 G171V muta-
tion was discovered when family members showed strikingly high
BMD in clinical screenings while reporting difﬁculty staying aﬂoat
while swimming and no history of bone fractures44,45. The gain-of-
function variant induces BMD about ﬁve times greater than the mean
of the general population.
The EPOR W439X mutation was found through linkage analysis of
almost 100 family members46. The mutation elicits the beneﬁcial
symptoms of erythrocytosis (such as increased hemoglobin count,
hematocrit count, and oxygen transport capacity) with only mild or
minimal negative effects46. Interestingly, one proband, who had
hemoglobin >200 g/L since childhood, was an Olympic gold medalist
in cross-country skiing46. Annotating the network underpinnings of
this allele could unravel new methods to combat clinical conditions
that space travelers routinely suffer when exposed to altered gas
composition in spacecraft.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
4

Human cohorts: Isolated populations
Isolated populations have also revealed alleles linked to alleviated
clinical manifestations of diseases like atherosclerosis and cancer
(Fig. 3). For instance, in a patient from Limone sul Garda (an isolated
village in Northern Italy), the APOA1 R173C mutation was associated
with low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels and elevated trigly-
cerides, but unexpectedly no atherosclerotic disease47. When the
complete Limone sul Garda population was sampled (n = 1000 total),
33 living carriers of the “ApoA-1 Milano” mutation were identiﬁed47,
all with low HDL, and yet low incidence of heart disease. Genealogical
analysis using church records suggested they were all possible
descendants of one man born in the village in 178048. Patients with
acute coronary syndromes intravenously administered R173C phos-
pholipid
complexes
show
signiﬁcant
regression
of
coronary
atherosclerosis49.
Studying the protective effects linked to APOA1 could reveal new
methods to mitigate the risk of myocardial infarction and athero-
sclerosis, especially since astronauts endure above-average radiation
exposure50,51. However, it is still unclear whether spaceﬂight, particu-
larly long-duration missions outside LEO, may increase long-term
atherosclerotic risk52. Statins may reduce radiation-induced athero-
sclerosis, but published results are thus not conclusive. The absence of
suitable prophylaxes for atherosclerosis risk in both terrestrial humans
exposed to radiation and astronauts exposed to space radiation
R
Rodent
R
Rodent
CTNNB1
BDKRB2
EGLN1
EPAS1
EPOR
MTHFR
PDE10A
TERT
SIRT1
CDKN2A
GHR
HSD17B13
IFNL4
CCR5
ANGPTL3
APOA1
PCSK9
MSTN
MAFBX
MURF1
LRP5
SOST
Gene
Protective
Effect
Bone retention
Bone retention
Muscle retention
Muscle retention
Muscle growth & cardio
output
Less atherosclerosis
Less cardiovascular
disease
Less cardiovascular
disease
Less heart diseases &
infections
Less chronic liver disease
Improved hepatitis C 
clearance
Less cancer risk
Less cancer & aging
Improved insulin
resistance
Less aging
Aging
Bones
Heart
Liver & 
Infections
Oxygen
Muscle
Radiation
Physiology
Disease
Risks
Cancer
Diabetes
Variant
Linked to
Protection
Polymor-
phism
Evidence of
Protection
Observed 
Space-Induced
Change 
Improved oxygen
regulation
Improved oxygen
regulation
High altitude
High altitude
High oxygen transport
Radiation protection
High altitude, UV
radiation protection
Earth
Space
MC1R
Radiation protection
in vivo
in vitro
Earth
Space
Variant Linked to Effect
Level of Evidence
Human
Human
Rodent
Rodent
Known
Harmful
Effect
Exercise &
Nutrition
Clinical
Trials
Health & Clinic
H
H
1
3
2
4
1
3
2
4
Associated with 
exercise or nutrition
Studied in
clinical trials
R
Rodent
R
Rodent
H
More usage
Less usage
Altered function
Identified polymorphism 
linked to phenotype
Evidence of harmful effects
linked to variant
Fig. 3 | Literature review of evidence for protective alleles. Literature review and
its key ﬁndings for a subset of alleles that may be linked to health protective effects,
many of which occur naturally in the human population. From left to right: the gene
name; example protective phenotypes; whether a polymorphism hasbeen linkedto
the protective phenotype; whether the protective phenotype typically relates to
over, under, or variant function of the gene; the level of evidence of protection for
the variant on Earth (green icons) or in space (blue icons); and examples of known
harmful associations with this allele. We further include if the gene or its related
pathway can be targeted with exercise or nutrition (purple icon), has been studied
in clinical trials (green icon), or has been observed to alter function during space-
ﬂight. Only the highest level of evidence we found is displayed, with in vivo being
deﬁned as stronger evidence than in vitro, and health beneﬁts for human subjects
being deﬁned as higher evidence than health beneﬁts for rodent subjects. Empty
cells indicate instances in which we were unable to ﬁnd moderate evidence based
on current literature. Partly created with BioRender.com released under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International license. More
details and literature references are provided in the Supplementary Data.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
5

motivates the thorough analysis of the APOA1 R173C mechanism to
potentially uncover safe and effective therapeutic compounds.
Additional examples of alleles linked to protective effects found in
families include those related to Laron syndrome and genetic markers
in Longevity Blue Zone (LBZ) populations. Laron syndrome is a rare
condition that has been disproportionately reported in remote and
inbred villages in the Loja province of Ecuador53. Patients typically have
mutations in the GHR gene that are linked to growth hormone deﬁ-
ciency and decreased stature but are also linked to extended health
span by potentially mitigating cancer and diabetes54. Given that cancer
is a primary cause of death and a major health risk in upcoming long-
term spaceﬂight, understanding the physiological underpinnings of
GHR mutations associated with Laron syndrome could lead to poten-
tial anti-cancer therapies.
LBZs are areas where the local population consists of unusually
high numbers of elderly individuals. These LBZ populations have been
identiﬁed in Sardinia and the Greek island of Ikaria. When compared to
reference populations in Italy and Greece, LBZ populations show lower
frequencies in genetic risk markers in APOE4, APOE2, and the TT allele
of FOXO3, which are associated with an increased risk for Alzheimer’s
disease and decreased cognitive function55.
Human cohorts: Populations adapted to extreme environments
Research on human adaptation to extreme environments has also
revealed alleles with health implications applicable to spaceﬂight
(Fig. 3), including deep-diving adaptations in indigenous Bajau people
and high-altitude adaptation in indigenous people of the Tibetan Pla-
teau. Both populations have adapted to lifestyles in which the gas
composition of their surroundings is uniquely altered compared to
most human populations, potentially informing new approaches to
combat physiological maladies that many astronauts endure due to
altered gas composition (e.g. hypercapnia) on the ISS.
The Bajau people, sometimes referred to as “Sea Nomads”, have
lived marine hunter-gatherer lifestyles in Southeast Asian seas for over
1000 years56. They are renowned for their remarkable breath-holding
abilities, diving up to 73 meters using only wooden goggles and
spending up to ﬁve hours each day apnea diving (breath-hold diving).
One recent study found that Bajau people have signiﬁcantly larger
spleens than Saluan people, geographical neighbors with minimal
marine-related lifestyles57. The likely cause is natural selection onallelic
variants in the PDE10A gene, which are associated with larger spleen
size, providing them with additional reserves of oxygenated red blood
cells. The study also found evidence of strong selection for variants in
the BDKRB2 gene, thought to increase peripheral vasoconstriction to
preferentially redirect blood ﬂow to critical tissues like the brain, heart,
and lungs. Other candidate genes that appeared to be selected in the
Bajau population included FAM178B, which encodes a protein that
helps prevent the buildup of carbon dioxide, and CACNA1A, which
regulates response to hypoxic conditions58.
Insights into the genotypic physiology of hypoxia have not only
emerged from populations who adapted to the seas, but also from
those who adapted to the mountains. For millennia, people have lived
on the Tibetan Plateau, which is surrounded by the two highest sum-
mits on Earth (Mount Everest and K2). The plateau averages ~4,000
meters above sea level and has 60% of the oxygen concentration and
130% of the UV radiation compared to sea level59. Several alleles were
recently found under natural selection, likely due to the high-altitude
lifestyle of this population60, including variants in the EGLN1 (HIF-PH2)
gene, which prevents degradation of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs).
This HIF response allows for increased expression of hypoxia-inducible
genes and confers a low hematocrit phenotype, which is advantageous
in high altitudes and showed expression changes in the NASA Twins
Study6. The Tibetan population has an enrichment of mutations in the
EPAS1 (HIF-2A) gene, which encodes subunits of HIFs that contribute to
the development of blood vessels and render a low hemoglobin
phenotype, while reducing any negative ﬁtness consequences of
excess red blood cell production60. Moreover, alleles in the MTHFR
gene tend to create a low homocysteine and high folate phenotype in
the Tibetan population, which can provide protection from hyperho-
mocysteinemia, endothelial cell injury, inﬂammation of blood vessels,
and ischemic injury. The high folate phenotype also provides com-
pensatory protection from UV radiation exposure, given that UV
radiation degrades folate and folic acid in human blood.
Elucidating how the Bajau and Tibetan populations adapted to
hypoxia may have clinical implications for people with conditions such
as anemia, cytopenia, and hypoxia from intensive care treatment,
tumorigenesis, and life in space. Also, carbon dioxide levels are typi-
cally higher on the ISS than on Earth and are associated with decreased
cognitive scores and increased headaches in astronauts6,61. Further-
more, gas composition in future Martian settlements could deviate at
even greater ranges, given the atmospheric differences and unknown
habitat designs.
Humans have also experienced allelic adaptations to dietary
habits, including lactase persistence from pastoralism in African
populations62 and modulation of fatty acid metabolism from fatty acid-
rich diets in Greenland populations63. Although these speciﬁc diets
may not have direct implications for space nutrition, spaceﬂight food
is restricted, and the diets of space travelers signiﬁcantly differ from
nominal terrestrial diets. Investigation of the interaction of dietary
habits and omics may one day lead to healthier solutions for the lim-
ited spaceﬂight menu and possibly survey how future Martian societies
biologically adapt over multiple generations to their unique nutritional
lifestyles.
Studying omics for improved spaceﬂight nutrition
Nutritional counseling based on omics has also beneﬁted individuals
with both rare (phenylketonuria) and common (lactose intolerance)
genetic variants that entail customized dietary approaches64. Other
evidence of genetic variants modifying responses to numerous nutri-
ents and food bioactives has also emerged, including vitamins (A, B12,
C, and D), fats (polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fatty acids),
caffeine, calcium, choline, folate, and iron65. Stratiﬁed outcomes were
found for immunity, inﬂammation, the health of various organs (bone,
heart, muscle, and liver), endurance, strength training recovery, and
visuomotor skills, all of which can be pivotal for athletes, the young, or
the elderly.
Given the above evidence, omics metrics can also inform nutrition
during space exploration. One unique example where this application
has already proven meaningful relates to a distinctive ailment called
spaceﬂight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS), which has no
known terrestrial analogues. The disease appears to present in a subset
of astronauts after short- and long-duration spaceﬂight, more so in men
than women, and includes choroidal folds, optic disk edema (swelling),
and focal areas of the ischemic retina (cotton wool spots). Research has
suggested that SANS may be associated with lower levels of various
types of vitamin B, combined with common variations in one-carbon
metabolism genes66. This intriguing ﬁnding illustrates the potential uti-
lity of omics to inform optimal nutrition during spaceﬂight.
Dietary interventions speciﬁcally related to alleles listed in Fig. 3
could counteract space-induced inﬂammation. For example, several
plant polyphenols can directly or indirectly activate SIRT1, which can
reduce immune dysfunction, oxidative stress, autoimmunity, and
inﬂammation67. In addition to immunological issues in space, the
human body stores more iron during spaceﬂight (e.g. NASA Twins
Study), which has been linked to increased oxidative stress and
decreased regional BMD, further underscoring the potential of plant-
based, antioxidant interventions for spaceﬂight nutrition. Also,
improved insulin resistance from SIRT1 may share common bio-
chemical pathways with numerous foods rich in polyphenols, includ-
ing resveratrol (peanuts, grapes, and berries); piceatannol (Japanese
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
6

knotweed); and ﬁsetin (lotus root, persimmons, and apples)68. Space
crews often experience increased insulin resistance69 and thus may
beneﬁt from consuming some nutritional derivatives, particularly
those who are prone to possess low levels of SIRT1. Studying numerous
other space-related allele variants displayed in Fig. 3 may similarly
inform aerospace nutrition: The polyphenol curcumin increases LRP5
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression and may instill similar bone-
protective mechanisms of LRP5 variants70 as described above, the
pigment β-Carotene is linked to the anti-aging beneﬁts similar to TERT
overproduction variants and may mitigate telomere attrition71, ﬂa-
vones have inhibitory effects on MAFBX (FBXO32, ATROGIN-1) expres-
sion and may prevent myotube diameter reduction during muscle
atrophy72, and the plant alkaloid Berberine may inhibit PCSK9 and
reduce unhealthy cholesterol levels73.
Moreover, as astrobotany techniques progress, a wider selection
of food crops could become successfully cultivable in space, and their
nutritional and therapeutic properties could translate into valid
countermeasures that avoid the negative side effects of pharmaceu-
ticals and other space health approaches. Plant cells can deliver bio-
molecules that could beneﬁt health in spaceﬂight: indeed, plants
bioencapsulated with proinsulin have been shown to regulate blood
sugar levels74. Metabolomics can help disentangle which space-farmed
products may confer the most effective remedies for human illnesses
during space exposure and which plants hold the greatest nutritional
beneﬁt per weight75. Plants in spaceﬂight can provide not only a wider
assortment of nutrients, but also better air regeneration, water recy-
cling, and mental health for astronauts, which could reduce ﬂight risks.
Also, discoveries in low-input and low-waste vegetation technology in
space could be spun off to enhance sustainable agriculture back
on Earth.
Pharmacogenomics and optimized drug prescribing in space
Spaceﬂight pharmacogenomics (SPGx) is the study of gene variants
that
inﬂuence
the
regulation
of
drug
metabolism
in
space
operations76,77. The drug-gene response can inﬂuence safety and efﬁ-
cacy, which can have a notable inﬂuence on health and performance.
To date, there are roughly 570 drug-gene combinations used in ter-
restrial medicine for which pharmacogenomics-guided prescribing
recommendations have been established by the FDA.
One example of PGx relevant to spaceﬂight regards the phe-
nomenon of statin-induced myopathy. Muscle loss in space remains a
persistent challenge, so agents that facilitate myopathy in space are
contraindicated. This can be contextualized by reviewing an investi-
gation of a large military veteran cohort. Out of 7,769,356 veterans
who took part in the study, nearly 55% took at least one drug with
strong evidence of altered metabolism associated with a speciﬁc gene
mutation over the six-year study period. Of particular concern, of the
533,928 participants who received new prescriptions of simvastatin,
25.6% were projected to have a SNP variant in SLC01B1 (solute carrier
organic anion transporter family member 1B1). The SLCO1B1*5 variant
represents a loss‐of‐function allele known to attenuate the hepatic
uptake of atorvastatin78. This allele results in an increase in the amount
of the parent drug in systemic circulation, which may put individuals at
risk for myopathy, no matter the dose.
The principle of PGx in space can be further illustrated by the case
of codeine, which acts as a pain reliever via conversion to morphine by
CYP450 2D6. Astronauts with the CYP450 2D6 slow metabolizer phe-
notype would be expected to convert only 10% of codeine to mor-
phine. Therefore, codeine would be ineffective and should be removed
from the mission drug list. Conversely, a 2D6 ultrarapid metabolizer
will convert between 40 and 50% of codeine to morphine, which may
result in morphine overdose and risk mission safety. In this case,
codeine should be removed from the astronaut mission drug list
because it is not safe79,80. Similar patterns have been seen for tramadol,
where it may be ineffective for pain relief in slow metabolizers of
CYP450 2D6. In 2D6 ultra-rapid metabolizers, the Dutch Pharmaco-
genetics Working Group recommends reducing tramadol dosage by
30% because of its tendency to produce symptoms such as nausea,
vomiting, constipation, respiratory depression, confusion, and urinary
retention81.
Each of the above symptoms would be unideal or unacceptable on
a space mission. Fortunately, many drug-associated adverse events are
predictable and repeatable, because of known drug-gene dynamics.
Spaceﬂight PGx can be used to tailor mission drug lists in such a way
that drug efﬁcacy can be optimized, drug side effects can be reduced,
and astronaut safety and performance enhanced.
Technical challenges of studying human space omics
There are many challenges when studying genotype-phenotype
interactions, both on Earth and in spaceﬂight. Engaging with national
efforts (e.g. UK Biobank and the AllofUS program), as well as interna-
tional groups like the International Standards for Space Omics Pro-
cessing (ISSOP), can help develop standardization for space omics data
and clinical applications82. These efforts can help optimize the
extraction of actionable scientiﬁc ﬁndings from spaceﬂight omics data
and increase the probability of safe and effective countermeasures in
aerospace healthcare.
Alongside this promising side, we also follow with examples of
the numerous technical and ethical difﬁculties involved with basic
scientiﬁc research into the protective mechanisms linked to these
alleles. For instance, the protective mechanisms associated with
these alleles may present differently between in vitro and in vivo
studies, study designs, and location (in space versus on Earth). These
challenges are further convoluted by pleiotropy, whereby secondary
effects may accompany or even outweigh protective effects. In
addition, the small sample sizes in the human space omics discipline
may also increase the risk of over-associating spaceﬂight omics
changes with clinical meanings. Given these complexities, careful
collection of standardized data and metadata; multi-omics proﬁling
of consenting crew members before, during, and after spaceﬂight;
and methodical production of cell space atlases could all be
employed to better inform how to design safe and effective ther-
apeutic compounds, meal plans, exercise equipment, and lifestyle
recommendations that enhance protective effects and diminish
harmful effects in space83.
Statistical power, accuracy, and orthologs
Some difﬁculties with mapping protective alleles (e.g. in genome-
wide association studies, GWAS) include the lack of replicability, non-
coding annotations, and population stratiﬁcation, which also are
relevant for any polygenic risk score (PRS). The generalizability of a
PRS can be poor if the population of interest does not align with the
ancestry of the original GWAS study, a fact that can perpetuate health
disparities84. Another difﬁculty relates to how evidence for genetic
variations translates across populations, based on the impact of rare
versus common variants and low effect sizes versus large effect
sizes85. For example, the MTHFR gene is known to be highly poly-
morphic, and studies linking the A222V allele to diseases have found
conﬂicting results based on ancestry86. Potential solutions may
require increasing sample sizes of study populations and accounting
for factors like geographical location, genome reference, ancestry,
sex, and age87.
In addition, as shown in Supplementary Data 2, research into
potentially protective alleles can sometimes have inconsistent ﬁnd-
ings between studies, and this may be partially due to experimental
differences that must be clearly documented in metadata. The
timeline of exposure is one of many metadata factors that can
drastically change measured outcomes. Standardization of these
metadata will be crucial to derive meaningful information from space
omics studies82.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
7

Pleiotropic complications
Eliciting protective genotype-phenotype relationships is also challen-
ging because several gene variants linked to protective phenotypes
can concurrently also be linked to negative, potentially fatal, pheno-
types. For example, while overproduction of TERT is linked to
decreased aging, it is also linked to cancer risk88; while variants of
PCSK9 are linked to decreased LDL and heart disease89, they are also
linked to diabetes90 and low cognition91; while CCR5 variants are linked
to decreased risks of cancer92, HIV93 and diseases of the heart94, liver95,
and brain96, they also correspond to increased risks of various viruses
like West Nile virus97; and while CTNNB1 overproduction is linked to
radiation resistance98, it is also linked to increased cancer risk99. To
complicate the matter, downstream effects of gene variants can
interact with each other; this is the case with SOST and LRP5, both
related to bone health100. Any nutrition and lifestyle recommendations,
and any compounds developed, from basic studies of these alleles
would need to meticulously ensure that concomitant negative effects
are circumvented.
Increasing the granularity of measures will allow for a better
understanding of the cellular microenvironments and individual cel-
lular subtypes, which could disentangle pleiotropic complications.
Indeed, several papers referenced in Supplementary Data 2 emphasize
the need for cell-type-speciﬁc studies to further resolve the physiology
of the alleles101. Single cell sequencing technologies can generate high
dimensional maps that resolve heterogeneous immunological cell
types, allowing for better delineation of immune responses to various
exposures and better interpretation of the immunosuppressive effects
of spaceﬂight102.
One speciﬁc example is an overexpression of SIRT1, which could
deliver protective phenotypes. However, SIRT1 may increase the life-
span of rodent subjects when only overexpressed in particular regions,
but not when overexpressed in the whole body103,104. Moreover, a
global increase in the expression of SIRT1 throughout all cells in the
body may even confer negative effects, particularly within subset
populations of T-helper cells, where it has been demonstrated to
compromise differentiation. Hence, understanding optimal expres-
sion changes at the cell-type and lineage-speciﬁc level will be necessary
to account for pleiotropic effects105.
Space-relevant harmful alleles
We note that there are naturally occurring human alleles we did not
highlight in this paper that are, in contrast, primarily known to be
linked to space-related harmful effects. For example, mutations in the
ATM gene may cause the disorder ataxia telangiectasia, and mutations
in the NBS1 gene may cause Nijmegen breakage syndrome; in both
cases, affected individuals can show chromosomal instability, radia-
tion sensitivity, and cancer susceptibility106–108. Additional genes rela-
ted to DNA repair, radiation sensitivity, and cancer predisposition
include RAD50, BRCA1, BRCA2, P53, among many others109–111. Investi-
gating these alleles may guide risk reduction during space exploration,
as well as for any type of experience on Earth in which individuals are
exposed to higher-than-average amounts of radiation.
Another example is the I148M variant of the PNPLA3 gene, asso-
ciated with an increased risk of chronic liver disease112. Interestingly,
harmful effects of the PNPLA3 I148M mutation can be mitigated by one
of the protective variants we listed in Fig. 3 (the rs72613567 variant of
the HSD17B13 gene) in an allele and dose-dependent manner113.
Counteracting risk for liver disease could be important, since space
stressors may activate lipotoxic pathways that further elevate liver
disease risk, potentially leading to lipid dysregulation and reduced
immune activity in susceptible spaceﬂight participants114,115.
In exploring genetic markers that confer potential risk in space, it
is useful to further explore the APOE4/4 (APOE4) genotype in the
context of novel exposures and cognitive changes. For example, there
is a well-established phenomenon of chemotherapy-related cognitive
impairment (CRCI), which appears to be increased in APOE4 carriers116.
In survivors of breast cancer who had undergone chemotherapy,
APOE4 carriers had worse visual memory and spatial ability when
examined ﬁve years after diagnosis. In breast cancer survivors, those
APOE4 carriers undergoing chemotherapy had signiﬁcantly lower
scores on measures of working memory and processing speed when
examined at 1-, 6-, and 18-months post-treatment117. In another study,
APOE4 breast cancer survivors treated with cytostatics had lower
scores on executive function, attention, and processing speed at one-
and two-years post-treatment118. Moreover, radiation-induced cogni-
tive decline shows similar deﬁcits in cognition. Cramer et al. showed
that, among patients undergoing therapeutic brain irradiation,
roughly 30% experience cognitive decline by 4 months. In those living
over 6 months, the rate increases to 50% or greater119. Makale et al.
have reported that 50-90% of those undergoing partial or whole brain
cranial radiation experience disabling cognitive impairment (thought
APOE status was not assessed by Cramer or Makale)120.
There is a paucity of human data related to APOE4 and spaceﬂight-
associated cognitive risks. If the APOE4 genotype confers additional
risk to cognitive decline in the presence of an exogenous stressor like
space radiation, this would warrant careful attention to the APOE4
genotype in the future design of experiments concerning human
spaceﬂight. It will also be important to determine whether the APOE2/2
genotype may be protective against cognitive decline in space in a
manner similar to the protective effects of APOE2 on cognition
on Earth.
To illustrate one ﬁnal example, the R506Q mutation of the F5 gene
(Factor V Leiden) is one of the most common inherited susceptibilities
to thrombophilia (blood clotting). The likelihood of blood clotting,
which can be life-threatening, increases up to 7-fold in heterozygous
carriers and up to 80-fold in homozygous individuals121. Immobility
(such as during ﬂight travel), increased estrogen levels (such as during
pregnancy, hormone replacement therapy, and oral contraceptive
use), and injuries (such as fractured bones) can further increase the
risk for affected individuals122. Astronauts are frequently exposed to
these associated risks, given the immobile nature of orbital ﬂights, the
personal decision by some participants to suppress menstruation with
oral contraceptives during space missions, and the projected heigh-
tened risk of bone fractures in long-duration spaceﬂight123. Individuals
could select speciﬁc countermeasures for blood clotting (such as
compression stockings and anticoagulant substances) based on their
personal risk proﬁles124.
Ethical challenges of studying human space omics
As discussed in this paper, the landscape of human spaceﬂight has
entered a transformative period of democratization, with increased
commercial
ﬂight
opportunities
and
collaborative
agreements
between government and private entities125. This increased diversity in
mission formats, ﬂight objectives, and stakeholders is creating a ripple
effect on ethics and regulation. Indeed, many policy discussions in
the context of human research and healthcare in space that were once
internal to government institutions now fall under the remit of the
public forum, as discussed elsewhere126. Widened discussion of policy
has been further expedited by a push for open science, reﬂected
through international data sharing and collaboration initiatives,
including the NASA Open Science Data Repository127 and the EXPAND
(Enhancing eXploration Platforms and Analog Deﬁnition) program of
the Translational Research Institute for Space Health (TRISH)128.
Space agencies and commercial entities seek to identify bio-
markers for spaceﬂight health effects to reﬁne risk prediction, opti-
mize mission planning, and elevate the standard of care for humans in
space via improved countermeasures. In this paper, we have reviewed
a number of published alleles naturally occurring in humans on Earth,
and we have suggested their potential inﬂuence on the body’s
response to the spaceﬂight environment. The use of allelic information
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
8

for optimizing precision healthcare is commonplace on Earth, such as
to avoid adverse reactions during drug prescriptions129, identify high-
risk individuals to preemptively screen for disease onset, or reﬁne
diagnosis and inform therapeutic approach130. Similarly, allelic infor-
mation and other omics could be used to optimize healthcare in space,
such as through integration into precision healthcare strategies for
government and commercial crew, the advent of which has been dis-
cussed elsewhere131. Of note, care should be taken that these alleles are
not used for discriminatory practices, and updated legislation like the
Genetic Information Non-Discrimination Act (GINA) may be needed to
account for the new risk paradigm of spaceﬂight and long-term care or
life insurance.
In terrestrial healthcare, emergent omics approaches also include
genetic and epigenetic modiﬁcation therapies132. If safely established on
Earth, in the far future, one can imagine that similar modiﬁcation
therapies may eventually be investigated as candidate interventions for
increased health and safety in crewed spaceﬂight, such as to protect
against space stressors during long-duration missions to Mars, the outer
solar system, and even beyond, as recently discussed18,105. While beyond
the scope of this manuscript, we note that gene therapy is a particularly
controversial subject matter, and its associated ethical challenges have
been discussed elsewhere in the context of human spaceﬂight133,134.
Discussion
In the foreseeable future, collecting, storing, and sharing omics data
from consenting humans venturing into space for use in research and
terrestrially
established
occupational
healthcare
strategies
also
requires careful policy to address a multitude of ethical challenges.
Indeed, ethical challenges include developing data accessibility and
sharing strategies without violation of privacy of individuals and family
members, achieving meaningful informed consent throughout the
entire data lifecycle, avoiding uses of data that support actions of a
discriminatory or inequitable nature, ensuring thorough and expert
ethical oversight of projects, and appropriately handling any incidental
ﬁndings from the data134, as well as issues regarding the challenge of
protecting astronauts135,136. Just as the landscape of human spaceﬂight
is diversifying in a positive and more inclusive manner, so too are the
opportunities for improving precision healthcare in ﬂight and on
longer missions137. For example, with genetic risk data in hand, indi-
viduals could exercise increased autonomy in making informed deci-
sions about participating in spaceﬂight activities.
In this paper, we reviewed an example set of published alleles
purportedly linked to protective effects, the biochemical pathways of
which could inform therapeutic compound discovery and nutrition,
exercise, and lifestyle recommendations to protect health during
spaceﬂight missions and potentially during postﬂight recovery and
stationing on planetary surfaces, including the Moon and Mars138. This
guide can also help individuals on Earth in high-stress and envir-
onmentally challenging scenarios, such as ﬁrst responders, cave
explorers, radiation workers, deep-sea investigators, or commercial
astronauts like the Inspiration4, Axoim Space, and Polaris Dawn
missions91,139–147. Alongside any untapped potential to enhance both
terrestrial and aerospace precision healthcare, investigation of such
alleles poses signiﬁcant technical and ethical challenges. If humanity
safely and effectively surmounts these hurdles, the revamped aero-
space health recommendations that ensue could be incorporated with
other types of countermeasures (such as artiﬁcial gravity, faster
spacecraft, radiation shielding, and biotechnology for food and
material production) in order to best preserve the well-being of life
during future deep space missions and interplanetary exploration.
References
1.
Fundamental Biological Features of Spaceﬂight. Advancing the
ﬁeld to enable deep-space exploration. Cell 183,
1162–1184 (2020).
2.
Schmidt, M. A. & Goodwin, T. J. Personalized medicine in human
space ﬂight: using Omics based analyses to develop individua-
lized countermeasures that enhance astronaut safety and perfor-
mance. Metabolomics 9, 1134–1156 (2013). pp.
3.
Cope, H. et al. Routine omics collection is a golden opportunity for
European human research in space and analog environments.
Patterns 3, 100550 (2022).
4.
Ruyters, G., Stang, K. Space medicine 2025 – A vision. REACH.
55–62 (2016).
5.
Bennett, J. M. et al. The evolution of critical thermal limits of life on
Earth. Nat. Commun. 12, 1198 (2021).
6.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E., et al. The NASA Twins Study: A multi-
dimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science.
364 (2019).
7.
Ren, Z. et al. Biomanufacturing of 3D tissue constructs in micro-
gravity and their applications in human pathophysiological stu-
dies. Adv. Health. Mater. 12, e2300157 (2023).
8.
Chancellor, J. C. et al. Limitations in predicting the space
radiation health risk for exploration astronauts. NPJ Microgravity 4,
8 (2018).
9.
Obrador, E. et al. Radioprotection and Radiomitigation: From the
bench to clinical practice. Biomedicines 8, 461 (2020).
10.
Hopewell, J. W. Models of CNS radiation damage during space
ﬂight. Adv. Space Res 14, 433–442 (1994).
11.
Moreels, M., de Saint-Georges, L., Vanhavere, F., Baatout, S. Stress
and radiation responsiveness. Stress Challenges Immun. Space.
239–260 (2012).
12.
Cortese, F. et al. Vive la radiorésistance!: converging research in
radiobiology and biogerontology to enhance human radio-
resistance for deep space exploration and colonization. Onco-
target 9, 14692–14722 (2018).
13.
Restier-Verlet, J. et al. Radiation on Earth or in space: What does it
change? Int J. Mol. Sci. 22, 3739 (2021).
14.
Durante, M., Manti, L. Human response to high-background
radiation environments on Earth and in space. Adv. Space Res.
999–1007 (2008).
15.
Cucinotta, F. A., Kim, M.-H. Y., Willingham, V. & George, K. A.
Physical and biological organ dosimetry analysis for international
space station astronauts. Radiat. Res 170, 127–138 (2008).
16.
Cucinotta, F. A. & Durante, M. Cancer risk from exposure to
galactic cosmic rays: implications for space exploration by human
beings. Lancet Oncol. 7, 431–435 (2006).
17.
Cucinotta, F. A. & Cacao, E. Non-targeted effects models predict
signiﬁcantly higher mars mission cancer risk than targeted effects
models. Sci. Rep. 7, 1832 (2017).
18.
Iosim, S., MacKay, M., Westover, C. & Mason, C. E. Translating
current biomedical therapies for long duration, deep space mis-
sions. Precis Clin. Med. 2, 259–269 (2019).
19.
Durante, M. Space radiation protection: Destination Mars. Life Sci.
Space Res. 1, 2–9 (2014).
20.
Clancy P., Brack A., Horneck, G. Looking for Life, Searching the
Solar System. Cambridge University Press; 2005.
21.
Smith, S. M. & Zwart, S. R. Chapter 3 nutritional biochemistry of
spaceﬂight. Adv. Clin. Chem. 46, 87–130 (2008). pp.
22.
Durante, M. & Cucinotta, F. A. Heavy ion carcinogenesis and
human space exploration. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8, 465–472 (2008).
23.
Ponder B. A. J. Cancer genetics. Nature. 336–341 (2001).
24.
Foray, N., Bourguignon, M. & Hamada, N. Individual response to
ionizing radiation. Mutat. Res. 770, 369–386 (2016).
25.
Pavez Loriè, E. et al. The future of personalized medicine in space:
from observations to countermeasures. Front Bioeng. Biotechnol.
9, 739747 (2021).
26.
Antonsen, E. L. & Reed, R. D. Policy considerations for precision
medicine in human spaceﬂight. Hous. J. Health L Pol’y 19, 1
(2019).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
9

27.
Rosen, E. M., Day, R. & Singh, V. K. New approaches to radiation
protection. Front Oncol. 4, 381 (2014).
28.
LeBlanc, A. D., Spector, E. R., Evans, H. J. & Sibonga, J. D. Skeletal
responses to space ﬂight and the bed rest analog: a review. J.
Musculoskelet. Neuronal. Interact. 7, 33–47 (2007).
29.
Oganov, V. S., Bogomolov, V. V. The human skeletal system in
weightlessness: A review of research data, hypotheses, and the
possibility of predicting the state in long-term (Interplanetary)
missions. Hum. Physiol. 768–776 (2011).
30.
Gabel, L. et al. Incomplete recovery of bone strength and trabe-
cular microarchitecture at the distal tibia 1 year after return from
long duration spaceﬂight. Sci. Rep. 12, 9446 (2022).
31.
Axpe, E. et al. A human mission to Mars: Predicting the bone
mineral density loss of astronauts. PLoS One 15, e0226434 (2020).
32.
Kondo, H. et al. Oxidative stress and gamma radiation-induced
cancellous bone loss with musculoskeletal disuse. J. Appl. Physiol.
108, 152–161 (2010).
33.
Baxter, N. N., Habermann, E. B., Tepper, J. E., Durham, S. B. &
Virnig, B. A. Risk of pelvic fractures in older women following
pelvic irradiation. JAMA 294, 2587–2593 (2005).
34.
Lang, T. F., Leblanc, A. D., Evans, H. J. & Lu, Y. Adaptation of the
proximal femur to skeletal reloading after long-duration space-
ﬂight. J. Bone Min. Res. 21, 1224–1230 (2006).
35.
Smith, S. M. et al. Beneﬁts for bone from resistance exercise and
nutrition in long-duration spaceﬂight: Evidence from biochemistry
and densitometry. J. Bone Min. Res. 27, 1896–1906 (2012).
36.
English, K. L., Lee, S. M. C., Loehr, J. A., Ploutz-Snyder, R. J. &
Ploutz-Snyder, L. L. Isokinetic strength changes following long-
duration spaceﬂight on the ISS. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 86,
A68–A77 (2015).
37.
Crucian, B. E. et al. Countermeasures-based improvements in
stress, immune system dysregulation and latent herpesvirus
reactivation onboard the International Space Station - Relevance
for deep space missions and terrestrial medicine. Neurosci. Bio-
behav. Rev. 115, 68–76 (2020).
38.
Baca J., et al. Modular multi-motor exercise system for space
exploration. SN Appl. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-
2315-1 (2020).
39.
Smith, S. M., Zwart, S. R., Block, G., Rice, B. L. & Davis-Street, J. E.
The nutritional status of astronautsis altered after long-term space
ﬂight aboard the International Space Station. J. Nutr. 135,
437–443 (2005).
40.
Smith, S., Heer, M., Zwart, S. Nutrition and human space ﬂight:
Evidence from 4–6 month missions to the International Space
Station. Curr. Dev. Nutr. 1146–1146. (2020).
41.
Schuelke, M. et al. Myostatin mutation associated with gross
muscle hypertrophy in a child. N. Engl. J. Med. 350,
2682–2688 (2004).
42.
Becker, C. et al. Myostatin antibody (LY2495655) in older weak
fallers: a proof-of-concept, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol. 3, 948–957 (2015).
43.
Saremi, A. et al. Effects of oral creatine and resistance training on
serum myostatin and GASP-1. Mol. Cell Endocrinol. 317,
25–30 (2010).
44.
Boyden, L. M. et al. High bone density due to a mutation in LDL-
receptor–related Protein 5. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 1513–1521 (2002).
45.
Saxon, L. K., Jackson, B. F., Sugiyama, T., Lanyon, L. E. & Price, J. S.
Analysis of multiple bone responses to graded strains above
functional levels, and to disuse, in mice in vivo show that the
human Lrp5 G171V High Bone Mass mutation increases the
osteogenic response to loading but that lack of Lrp5 activity
reduces it. Bone 49, 184–193 (2011).
46.
de la Chapelle, A., Träskelin, A. L. & Juvonen, E. Truncated ery-
thropoietin receptor causes dominantly inherited benign human
erythrocytosis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90, 4495–4499 (1993).
47.
Weisgraber, K. H., Bersot, T. P., Mahley, R. W., Franceschini, G. &
Sirtori, C. R. A-Imilano apoprotein. Isolation and characterization
of a cysteine-containing variant of the A-I apoprotein from
human high density lipoproteins. J. Clin. Invest. 66,
901–907 (1980).
48.
Gualandri, V. et al. AIMilano apoprotein identiﬁcation of the
complete kindred and evidence of a dominant genetic transmis-
sion. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37, 1083–1097 (1985).
49.
Shah, P. K. HDL/apoA-I infusion for atherosclerosis management:
an emerging therapeutic paradigm. Future Lipidol. 55–64 (2006).
50.
Hauptmann, M., Mohan, A. K., Doody, M. M., Linet, M. S. & Mabu-
chi, K. Mortality from diseases of the circulatory system in radi-
ologic technologists in the United States. Am. J. Epidemiol. 157,
239–248 (2003).
51.
Yamada, M., Naito, K., Kasagi, F., Masunari, N. & Suzuki, G. Pre-
valence of atherosclerosis in relation to atomic bomb radiation
exposure: an RERF Adult Health Study. Int J. Radiat. Biol. 81,
821–826 (2005).
52.
Meerman, M. et al. Myocardial disease and long-distance space
travel: solving the radiation problem. Front. Cardiovasc. Med. 8,
631985 (2021).
53.
Guevara-Aguirre, J. et al. Growth hormone receptor deﬁciency
is associated with a major reduction in pro-aging signaling,
cancer, and diabetes in humans. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 70ra13
(2011).
54.
Coschigano, K. T. et al. Deletion, but not antagonism, of the mouse
growth hormone receptor results in severely decreased body
weights, insulin, and insulin-like growth Factor I levels and
increased life span. Endocrinology 144, 3799–3810 (2003).
55.
Poulain, M. et al. Speciﬁc features of the oldest old from the
Longevity Blue Zones in Ikaria and Sardinia. Mech. Ageing Dev.
198, 111543 (2021).
56.
Schagatay, E. Human breath-hold diving ability and the underlying
physiology. Hum. Evol. 29, 125–140 (2014).
57.
Ilardo, M. A. et al. Physiological and genetic adaptations to diving
in sea nomads. Cell 173, 569–580.e15 (2018).
58.
Wang, V., Davis, D. A., Haque, M., Eric Huang, L. & Yarchoan, R.
Differential gene up-regulation by Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1α
and Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-2α in HEK293T cells. Cancer Res.
65, 3299–3306 (2005).
59.
Beall, C. M. Two routes to functional adaptation: Tibetan and
Andean high-altitude natives. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA. 104,
8655–8660 (2007).
60.
Yang, J. et al. Genetic signatures of high-altitude adaptation in
Tibetans. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 4189–4194 (2017).
61.
Beheshti, A., Cekanaviciute, E., Smith, D. J. & Costes, S. V. Global
transcriptomic analysis suggests carbon dioxide as an environ-
mental stressor in spaceﬂight: A systems biology GeneLab case
study. Sci. Rep. 8, 4191 (2018).
62.
Ranciaro, A. et al. Genetic origins of lactase persistence and the
spread of pastoralism in Africa. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 94,
496–510 (2014).
63.
Fumagalli, M. et al. Greenlandic Inuit show genetic signatures of
diet and climate adaptation. Science 349, 1343–1347 (2015).
64.
Neeha, V. S. & Kinth, P. Nutrigenomics research: a review. J. Food
Sci. Technol. 50, 415–428 (2013).
65.
Guest, N. S., Horne, J., Vanderhout, S. M. & El-Sohemy, A. Sport
nutrigenomics: personalized nutrition for athletic performance.
Front. Nutr. 6, 8 (2019).
66.
Zwart,S. R. et al. Genotype, B-vitamin status, and androgens affect
spaceﬂight-induced ophthalmic changes. FASEB J. 30,
141–148 (2016).
67.
Crucian, B. E. et al. Immune system dysregulation during space-
ﬂight: potential countermeasures for deep space exploration
missions. Front. Immunol. 9, 1437 (2018).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
10

68.
Sun, C. et al. SIRT1 improves insulin sensitivity under insulin-
resistant conditions by repressing PTP1B. Cell Metab. 6,
307–319 (2007).
69.
Hughson, R. L. et al. Increased postﬂight carotid artery stiffness
and inﬂight insulin resistance resulting from 6-mo spaceﬂight in
male and female astronauts. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.
310, H628–H638 (2016).
70.
Ahn, J., Lee, H., Kim, S. & Ha, T. Curcumin-induced suppression of
adipogenic differentiation is accompanied by activation of Wnt/
beta-catenin signaling. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 298,
C1510–C1516 (2010).
71.
Shammas, M. A. Telomeres, lifestyle, cancer, and aging. Curr.
Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 14, 28–34 (2011). pp.
72.
Shiota, C. et al. Flavones inhibit LPS-induced Atrogin-1/MAFbx
Expression in mouse C2C12 skeletal Myotubes. J. Nutr. Sci. Vita-
minol. 61, 188–194 (2015).
73.
Adorni, M. P., Zimetti, F., Lupo, M. G., Ruscica, M. & Ferri, N.
Naturally occurring PCSK9 inhibitors. Nutrients 12, 1440 (2020).
74.
Daniell, H. et al. Affordable oral proinsulin bioencapsulated in
plant cells regulates blood sugar levels similar to natural insulin.
Biomaterials 298, 122142 (2023).
75.
Mortimer, J. C. & Gilliham, M. SpaceHort: redesigning plants to
support space exploration and on-earth sustainability. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 73, 246–252 (2021).
76.
Schmidt, M. A., Schmidt, C. M., Goodwin, T. J. Pharmacogenomics
in Spaceﬂight: A Foundation of Personalized Medicine in Astro-
nauts. (2019).
77.
Pathak, Y., dos Santos, M., & Zea, L., (Eds). Handbook of Space
Pharmaceuticals. Springer Nature. Cham. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-50909-9_26-1.
78.
Wilke, R. A. et al. The clinical pharmacogenomics implementation
consortium: CPIC guideline for SLCO1B1 and simvastatin‐induced
myopathy. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 92, 112–117 (2012).
79.
Chanfreau-Cofﬁnier, C., Hull, L. E., Lynch, J. A. & Tuteja, S. Pro-
jected prevalence of actionable pharmacogenetic variants and
level a drugs prescribed among US veterans health administration
pharmacy users. JAMA Netw. Open 2, e195345 (2019).
80.
Schmidt, M. A., Jones, J. A. & Mason, C. E. Optimizing human
performance in extreme environments through precision medi-
cine: From spaceﬂight to high-performance operations on Earth.
Cambridge Prisms: Precision. Medicine 1, E27 (2023).
81.
Sven, J. J. et al. Pharmacogenetics: from bench to byte-an update
of guidelines. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 89, 662–673 (2011).
82.
Rutter, L. et al. A new era for space life science: International
Standards for Space Omics Processing. Patterns 1, 100148 (2020).
83.
Rutter, L. et al. Astronaut omics and the impact of space on the
human body at scale. Nat. Commun. (2024).
84.
Kim, M. S. et al. Testing the generalizability of ancestry-speciﬁc
polygenic risk scores to predict prostate cancer in sub-Saharan
Africa. Genome Biol. 23, 194 (2022).
85.
Wang, Q. et al. Rare variant contribution to human disease in
281,104 UK Biobank exomes. Nature 597, 527–532 (2021).
86.
Liew, S.-C. & Gupta, E. D. Methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHFR) C677T polymorphism: epidemiology,
metabolism and the associated diseases. Eur. J. Med. Genet. 58,
1–10 (2015).
87.
Rosenfeld, J. A., Mason, C. E. & Smith, T. M. Limitations of the
human reference genome for personalized genomics. PLoS One 7,
e40294 (2012).
88.
Tomás-Loba, A. et al. Telomerase reverse transcriptase delays
aging in cancer-resistant mice. Cell 135, 609–622 (2008).
89.
Rashid, S. et al. Decreased plasma cholesterol and hypersensi-
tivity to statins in mice lacking Pcsk9. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
102, 5374–5379 (2005).
90.
Schmidt, A. F. et al. PCSK9 genetic variants and risk of type 2
diabetes: a mendelian randomisation study. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol. 5, 97–105 (2017).
91.
Jones, C. J., et al. Molecular and physiologic changes in the
SpaceX Inspiration4 civilian crew. Nature. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-024-07648-x. (2024).
92.
Halama, N. et al. Tumoral immune cell exploitation in colorectal
cancer metastases can be targeted effectively by Anti-CCR5
therapy in cancer patients. Cancer Cell 29, 587–601 (2016).
93.
Hütter, G. et al. Long-term control of HIV by CCR5 Delta32/
Delta32 stem-cell transplantation. N. Engl. J. Med. 360,
692–698 (2009).
94.
Lin, C.-S. et al. The CCL5/CCR5 axis promotes vascular smooth
muscle cell proliferation and atherogenic phenotype switching.
Cell Physiol. Biochem. 47, 707–720 (2018).
95.
Perez-Martinez, L. et al. Maraviroc, a CCR5 antagonist, ameliorates
the development of hepatic steatosis in a mouse model of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
69, 1903–1910 (2014).
96.
Joy, M. T. et al. CCR5 is a therapeutic target for recovery after
stroke and traumatic brain injury. Cell 176, 1143–1157.e13 (2019).
97.
Klein, R. S. A moving target: the multiple roles of CCR5 in infec-
tious diseases. J. Infect. Dis. 197, 183–186 (2008).
98.
Woodward, W. A. et al. WNT/beta-catenin mediates radiation
resistance of mouse mammary progenitor cells. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. 104, 618–623 (2007).
99.
Liu, X. et al. β-Catenin overexpression in malignant glioma and its
role in proliferation and apoptosis in glioblastma cells. Med.
Oncol. 28, 608–614 (2011).
100. Robling, A. G., Castillo, A. B., Turner, C. H. Biomechanical and
molecular regulation of bone remodeling. Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng.
455–498. (2006).
101.
Wilbrey-Clark, A., Roberts, K. & Teichmann, S. A. Cell Atlas tech-
nologies and insights into tissue architecture. Biochem. J. 477,
1427–1442 (2020).
102.
Guéguinou, N. et al. Could spaceﬂight-associated immune system
weakening preclude the expansion of human presence beyond
Earth’s orbit? J. Leukoc. Biol. 86, 1027–1038 (2009).
103.
Satoh, A. et al. Sirt1 extends life span and delays aging in mice
through the regulation of Nk2 homeobox 1 in the DMH and LH. Cell
Metab. 18, 416–430 (2013).
104.
Herranz, D. et al. Sirt1 improves healthy ageing and protects from
metabolic syndrome-associated cancer. Nat. Commun. 1,
3 (2010).
105.
Mason, C. E. The Next 500 Years: Engineering Life to Reach New
Worlds. MIT Press; 2021.
106.
Savitsky, K. et al. A single ataxia telangiectasia gene with a product
similar to PI-3 kinase. Science 268, 1749–1753 (1995).
107.
Pluth, J. M. et al. DNA double-strand break and chromosomal
rejoining defects with misrejoining in Nijmegen breakage syn-
drome cells. DNA Repair 7, 108–118 (2008).
108.
di Masi, A. & Antoccia, A. NBS1 heterozygosity and cancer risk.
Curr. Genomics 9, 275–281 (2008).
109.
Waltes, R. et al. Human RAD50 deﬁciency in a Nijmegen Breakage
Syndrome-like disorder. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84, 605–616 (2009).
110.
Hall, E. J., Brenner, D. J., Worgul, B. & Smilenov, L. Genetic sus-
ceptibility to radiation. Adv. Space Res. 35, 249–253 (2005). pp.
111.
Komarova, E. A. et al. Dual effect of p53 on radiation sensitivity
in vivo: p53 promotes hematopoietic injury, but protects from
gastro-intestinal syndrome in mice. Oncogene 23,
3265–3271 (2004).
112.
Romeo, S. et al. Genetic variation in PNPLA3 confers susceptibility
to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Nat. Genet 40,
1461–1465 (2008).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
11

113.
Abul-Husn, N. S. et al. A protein-truncating HSD17B13 variant and
protection from chronic liver disease. N. Engl. J. Med 378,
1096–1106 (2018).
114.
Beheshti, A. et al. Multi-omics analysis of multiple missions to
space reveal a theme of lipid dysregulation in mouse liver. Sci.
Rep. 9, 19195 (2019).
115.
da Silveira, W. A. et al. Comprehensive multi-omics analysis
reveals mitochondrial stress as a central biological hub for
spaceﬂight impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201.e20 (2020).
116.
Fernandez, H. R., Varma, A., Flowers, S. A. & Rebeck, G. W.
Cancer chemotherapy related cognitive impairment and the
impact of the Alzheimer’s disease risk factor APOE. Cancers 12,
3842 (2020).
117.
Ahles, T. A. et al. Longitudinal assessment of cognitive changes
associated with adjuvant treatment for breast cancer: The impact
of APOE and smoking. Psycho-Oncol. 23, 1382–1390 (2014).
118.
Mandelblatt, J. S. et al. Cancer-related cognitive outcomes among
older breast cancer survivors in the thinking and living. Cancer
Study J. Clin. Oncol. 36, 3211–3222 (2018).
119.
Cramer, C. K. et al. Treatment of radiation-induced cognitive
decline in adult brain tumor patients. Curr. Treat. Options
Oncol. (2017).
120.
Makale, M. T. et al. Mechanisms of radiotherapy-associated cog-
nitive disability in patients with brain tumors. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 133,
52–64 (2017).
121.
Rosendaal, F. R., Koster, T., Vandenbroucke, J. P. & Reitsma, P. H.
High risk of thrombosis in patientshomozygous for factor V Leiden
(activated protein C resistance). Blood 85, 1504–1508 (1995).
122.
Cannegieter, S. C., Doggen, C. J. M., van Houwelingen, H. C. &
Rosendaal, F. R. Travel-related venous thrombosis: results from a
large population-based case control study (MEGA study). PLoS
Med. 3, e307 (2006).
123.
Jain, V. & Wotring, V. E. Medically induced amenorrhea in female
astronauts. NPJ Microgravity 2, 16008 (2016).
124.
Clarke, M. J., Broderick, C., Hopewell, S., Juszczak, E. & Eisinga, A.
Compression stockings for preventing deep vein thrombosis in
airline passengers. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 4,
CD004002 (2021).
125.
Griko, Y. V., Loftus, D. J., Stolc, V. & Peletskaya, E. Private space-
ﬂight: a new landscape for dealing with medical risk. Life Sci.
Space Res. 33, 41–47 (2022).
126.
Seylani, A. et al. Ethical considerations for the age of non-
governmental space exploration. Nat. Commun. In press. (2024).
127.
Ray, S. et al. GeneLab: Omics database for spaceﬂight experi-
ments. Bioinformatics 35, 1753–1759 (2019).
128.
Urquieta, E., Wu, J., Hury, J. & Donoviel, D. Establishment of an
open biomedical database for commercial spaceﬂight. Nat. Med.
28, 611–612 (2022).
129.
Mega, J. L. et al. Reduced-function CYP2C19 genotype and risk of
adverse clinical outcomes among patients treated with clopido-
grel predominantly for PCI: a meta-analysis. JAMA 304,
1821–1830 (2010).
130.
Chapman, P. B. et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in mel-
anoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N. Engl. J. Med. 364,
2507–2516 (2011).
131.
Cope, H. et al. A data collection programme for improving
healthcare in UK human spaceﬂight ventures. J. Br. Interplanet.
Soc. 76, 213–220 (2023).
132.
Frangoul, H. et al. CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing for sickle cell disease
and β-Thalassemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 384, 252–260 (2021).
133.
Szocik, K. et al. Future space missions and human enhancement:
Medical and ethical challenges. Futures 133, 102819 (2021).
134.
Knoppers, B. M. & Thorogood, A. M. Ethics and big data in health.
Curr. Opin. Syst. Biol. 4, 53–57 (2017).
135.
Winglee, R. Advances in magnetized plasma propulsion and
radiation shielding. Proceedings. 2004 NASA/DoD Conference on
Evolvable Hardware. https://doi.org/10.1109/eh.2004.
1310849 (2004).
136.
Hargens, A. R., Bhattacharya, R. & Schneider, S. M. Space phy-
siology VI: exercise, artiﬁcial gravity, and countermeasure devel-
opment for prolonged space ﬂight. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 113,
2183–2192 (2013).
137.
Nangle, S. N. et al. The case for biotech on Mars. Nat. Biotechnol.
38, 401–407 (2020).
138.
Church, C. Protective alleles. [cited 21 Aug 2023]. Available:
https://arep.med.harvard.edu/gmc/protect.html
139.
Overbey, E. G., et al. The Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA)
and international astronaut biobank. Nature https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-024-07639-y (2024).
140.
Mason, C. E., et al. A second space age spanning omics, platforms,
and medicine across orbits. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-024-07586-8 (2024).
141.
Kim, J., et al. Single-cell multi-ome and immune proﬁles of the
Inspiration4 crew reveal conserved, cell-type, and sex-speciﬁc
responses to spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-49211-2. (2024).
142.
Tierney, B., et al. Longitudinal multi-omics analysis of host
microbiome architecture and immune responses during short-
term spaceﬂight. Nat. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-
024-01635-8. (2024).
143.
Park J., et al. Spatial multi-omics of human skin reveals KRAS and
inﬂammatory responses to spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-024-48625-2. (2024).
144.
Overbey, E. G., et al. Collection of biospecimens from the
Inspiration4 Mission establishes the standards for the Space
Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA). Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-024-48806-z. (2024).
145.
Houerbi, N., et al. Secretome proﬁling reveals acute changes in
oxidative stress, brain homeostasis, and coagulation following
short-duration spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41467-024-48841-w. (2024).
146.
Grigorev, K. et al. Direct RNA sequencing of astronaut blood
reveals spaceﬂight-associated m6A increases and hematopoietic
transcriptional responses. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-48929-3. (2024).
147.
Garcia Medina, S. Genome and Clonal Hematopoiesis stability
contrasts with immune, cfDNA, mitochondrial, and telomere
length changes to short duration spaceﬂight. Precis. Clin. Med. In
press. https://doi.org/10.1093/pcmedi/pbae007. (2024).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Sergey Ponomarev (IBMP Russian Academy of Sci-
ences), Raúl Herranz (Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas “Margarita
Salas” (CSIC)), Liz Warren (Blue Origin), Ryan T. Scott (KBR; NASA Ames
Research Center), Deanne Taylor (University of Pennsylvania), and
Richard Barker (University of Wisconsin-Madison). Selected elements
from Fig. 2 were created with BioRender.com. LAR and MM are sup-
ported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) funding
JP15H05940 and JP20H03234. LAR is supported by the JSPS post-
doctoral fellowship P20382. European (HC, NJS, and SG) contribution is
supported by the ESA Topical Team “Space Omics: Towards an inte-
grated ESA/NASA-omics database for spaceﬂight and ground facilities
experiments” grant 4000131202/20/NL/PG/pt. SG is supported by For-
mas grant 2017-01066_3. HC is supported by the Horizon Centre for
Doctoral Training at the University of Nottingham (UKRI Grant No. EP/
S023305/1). NJS is supported by NASA (NSSC22K0250, NSSC22K0278).
CEM thanks the WorldQuant Foundation, NASA (NNX14AH50G,
NNX17AB26G, 80NSSC23K0832, 80NSSC22K0254, NNH18ZTT001N-
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
12

FG2), the National Institutes of Health (R01MH117406, P01CA214274,
R01AI151059, R01CA249054, 7029-23), and the LLS (MCL7001-18,
LLS 9238-16).
Author contributions
Conceptualization: L.A.R., M.J.M., H.C., N.J.S., M.M., B.L., G.M.C., S.G.,
and C.E.M.. Methodology: L.A.R., M.J.M., B.L., S.G., and C.E.M. Software:
M.J.M. Formal Analysis: L.A.R. and M.J.M. Investigation: L.A.R., M.J.M.,
S.G., E.O., and C.E.M.. Resources: C.E.M. Data Curation: L.A.R., M.J.M.,
and B.T. Writing-Original Draft: L.A.R., B.L., and C.E.M. Writing-Review
and Editing: L.A.R., H.C., N.J.S., J.K., B.T., M.M., B.L., D.B., E.O., A.M.P.,
G.M.C., S.G., M.A.S., and C.E.M. Visualization: L.A.R. and M.J.M. Super-
vision: N.J.S., M.M., S.G., and C.E.M. Project Administration: S.G. and
C.E.M. Funding Acquisition: N.J.S., M.M., S.G., and C.E.M.
Competing interests
Christopher E. Mason is the Co-Founder of Onegevity Health. Daniela
Bezdan is the Co-founder of Poppy Health, Inc. and CSO of Yuri GmbH.
Stefania Giacomello is scientiﬁc advisor to 10x Genomics, which
holds IP rights to the ST technology and holds stocks. George M.
Church is an advisor to 10x Genomics, Colossal, Copernicus, etc,
details here: v.ht/PHNc. The remaining authors declare no competing
interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Michael A. Schmidt, George M. Church, Stefania Giacomello or
Christopher E. Mason.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49423-6
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:6158 
13
