Citation: Medina, F.-J.; Manzano, A.;
Herranz, R.; Kiss, J.Z. Red Light
Enhances Plant Adaptation to
Spaceﬂight and Mars g-Levels. Life
2022, 12, 1484. https://doi.org/
10.3390/life12101484
Academic Editors:
Elizabeth Kordyum and Karl
H Hasenstein
Received: 25 August 2022
Accepted: 20 September 2022
Published: 24 September 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
life
Review
Red Light Enhances Plant Adaptation to Spaceﬂight and
Mars g-Levels
Francisco-Javier Medina 1,*
, Aránzazu Manzano 1
, Raúl Herranz 1
and John Z. Kiss 2
1
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas—CSIC, 28040 Madrid, Spain
2
Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402-6170, USA
*
Correspondence: fjmedina@cib.csic.es
Abstract: Understanding how plants respond and adapt to extraterrestrial conditions is essential for
space exploration initiatives. Deleterious effects of the space environment on plant development
have been reported, such as the unbalance of cell growth and proliferation in the root meristem,
or gene expression reprogramming. However, plants are capable of surviving and completing the
seed-to-seed life cycle under microgravity. A key research challenge is to identify environmental
cues, such as light, which could compensate the negative effects of microgravity. Understanding
the crosstalk between light and gravity sensing in space was the major objective of the NASA-ESA
Seedling Growth series of spaceﬂight experiments (2013–2018). Different g-levels were used, with
special attention to micro-g, Mars-g, and Earth-g. In spaceﬂight seedlings illuminated for 4 days with
a white light photoperiod and then photostimulated with red light for 2 days, transcriptomic studies
showed, ﬁrst, that red light partially reverted the gene reprogramming induced by microgravity,
and that the combination of microgravity and photoactivation was not recognized by seedlings as
stressful. Two mutant lines of the nucleolar protein nucleolin exhibited differential requirements
in response to red light photoactivation. This observation opens the way to directed-mutagenesis
strategies in crop design to be used in space colonization. Further transcriptomic studies at different
g-levels showed elevated plastid and mitochondrial genome expression in microgravity, associated
with disturbed nucleus–organelle communication, and the upregulation of genes encoding auxin
and cytokinin hormonal pathways. At the Mars g-level, genes of hormone pathways related to stress
response were activated, together with some transcription factors speciﬁcally related to acclimation,
suggesting that seedlings grown in partial-g are able to acclimate by modulating genome expression
in routes related to space-environment-associated stress.
Keywords: light; microgravity; plant growth; root meristem; spaceﬂight; transcriptomics
1. Introduction
We have recently commemorated the 50th anniversary of the ﬁrst time that a human
being stepped on the surface of the Moon, the ﬁrst terrestrial body outside the Earth in
receiving humans. Nowadays, ﬁfty years after Astronaut Armstrong’s epic achievement,
space exploration by humans is commonly recognized as an exciting and attractive chal-
lenge and a powerful booster for scientiﬁc and technological progress in order to improve
human life on Earth [1]. This is true despite some minor criticisms that question the high
costs that it entails [2].
The establishment of permanent settlements in the Moon and Mars is becoming a
realistic possibility in the near future. After a decade of successful rover explorations to the
surface of Mars [3], both ESA and NASA, and more recently, the agencies from growing
economies in Asian countries, are working to promote a human mission, ﬁrst to the Moon,
and then to Mars.
The objectives of deep space exploration by humans, including of the Moon and Mars,
require the implementation of a complex system of life support for space explorers, capable
Life 2022, 12, 1484. https://doi.org/10.3390/life12101484
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/life

Life 2022, 12, 1484
2 of 17
of supplying the elements necessary for sustaining their life (oxygen, food, moisture, etc.)
and of removing their waste products. The system needs to be bioregenerative, i.e., the
components need to self-regenerate without the addition of new elements brought from
Earth, and energy-efﬁcient, only using the power sources available in space.
Plants are a candidate to occupy a key position in these bioregenerative life support
systems (BLSSs). They are indeed being used in all the initiatives tested currently, such
as MELiSSA—Micro-Ecological Life Support System Alternative [4,5]. There is no doubt
that plants must accompany humans in space exploration ventures, because they offer the
potential to provide food, replenish the air, ﬁlter water, and improve the psychological
wellbeing of the crew during long-duration missions in space.
The achievement of a true “space agriculture” is a fundamental objective of this global
enterprise, and the advances in this task are already producing substantial beneﬁts for the
efﬁciency and sustainability of the terrestrial agriculture [6,7]. The existence of “Martian
greenhouses” is an image that appears to be more common to the public eye. In these
greenhouses, plants could be provided with the necessary environmental elements to
enable their development. These elements include light, water, temperature, oxygen, CO2,
and aeration, in addition, obviously, to a substrate in which to anchor, from which the plant
will take nutrients through its roots. Apart from anchoring the root, the substrate (e.g., soil)
has to be capable of sustaining root development. Some published experiments have
demonstrated that terrestrial plants can grow in an analogue of lunar soil or Martian soil,
provided that this substrate is supplemented with additional elements and substances that
provide the plant with the water, mineral salts, and nutrients that it needs for its survival
and development [8]. Recently, plants have been grown in real Lunar regoliths brought
back by Apollo missions, showing that the Lunar regolith is capable of supporting plant
growth; however, it is not certainly the best substrate, because some stress was generated
in samples grown on it [9].
In addition to the issues originated by the alien soils and the supply of the environ-
mental conditions required for the growth of terrestrial plants, two important adverse
factors need to be counteracted. These are the gravity level, different from the Earth value
(microgravity—near 0 g—in orbit, 0.17 g for the Moon surface, and 0.38 g for the Mars
surface) and the existence of cosmic radiation. These two are the only environmental
factors that are unavoidable and unable to be counteracted using technological solutions
or elements available on Earth. Moreover, plants have not encountered these conditions
throughout their evolutionary history. Thus, the cultivation of plants in spaceﬂight, as well
as on the Moon and Mars, requires that the specimens to be cultivated become adapted
to grow and develop in the presence of these two environmental factors. To achieve this
objective, we ﬁrst need a full understanding of the biological mechanisms of response and
adaptation to conditions of the spaceﬂight environment. Obviously, the development of
technological countermeasures or the use of biological strategies that would mitigate the
unfavorable impact of gravity and radiation is a complementary strategy to consider.
2. Altered Gravity/Microgravity Disturbs Plant Growth
Plant seeds were, strictly speaking, the ﬁrst organisms in space, launched on a U.S.
V-2 rocket in 1946, representing some early suborbital biological experiments handled by
Harvard University and the Naval Research Laboratory [10]. Later, in 1966, the Soviet
Kosmos 110 was launched, carrying two dogs and moisturized seeds; some of the seeds
actually germinated. However, the ﬁrst scientiﬁc experiment consisting of growing plants
in space was carried out within the Oasis 1 hardware aboard the spacecraft Salyut 1 in
1971 [11], (reviewed by [12]). Then, experiments were performed on facilities installed in
the NASA Space Shuttle, or on the Soviet MIR Station. As for space research in general,
investigations on the response of plants to the space environment were signiﬁcantly boosted
after the assembly and operation of the International Space Station (ISS) [13]. In parallel,
similar plant growth experiments on Earth, using ground-based facilities for microgravity
simulation, such as clinostats and random positioning machines (RPMs), have successfully

Life 2022, 12, 1484
3 of 17
been performed [14,15]. In general, depending on the parameters studied, these have
provided a reliable replica of the biological results obtained in space experiments under real
microgravity, even though the gravity vector cannot possibly be avoided or removed on
the Earth’s surface [15–17]. Only drop-towers provide a real microgravity on Earth, but the
period of time for which the microgravity condition is generated in them is limited to just a
few seconds [18], which is too short for plant research. Parabolic ﬂights also provide a real
microgravity for experimentation, but it is preceded by a period of hypergravity [19], which
may alter the way an organism responds to microgravity. Suborbital ﬂights, especially
sounding rockets, have successfully been used for exposing plants to microgravity for
limited periods of time (i.e., in the order of minutes) [13,20].
The main conclusion obtained from pioneering space experiments in orbit was that
plants could survive and grow in space, although alterations were soon reported [21,22].
The results were sometimes contradictory, in most cases due to deﬁciencies in the experi-
mental setup and the devices used to germinate seeds and grow plants. Major improve-
ments in culture facilities have allowed us to conclude that microgravity itself does not
prevent plant growth and reproduction. In fact, the use of newly implemented research
facilities on the ISS led to impressive progress in plant biology research in space over the last
two decades [13,23]. However, the number of pending unresolved questions is enormous
and the difﬁculties and constraints of spaceﬂight research still represent major obstacles.
The ﬁrst European experiment on plant biology, carried out on the ISS in 2003, was
the ROOT experiment, included in the experimental program of the “Cervantes” Mission
(Spanish Soyuz Mission) with the objective of investigating alterations induced by the space
environment on cellular features of the root meristem. This experiment was performed
using autonomous hardware based on the former Biorack containers [24,25], still seriously
constrained regarding the environmental control of plant growth parameters [26]. Subse-
quently, a key step in this research on the ISS was the installation of the European Modular
Cultivation System (EMCS), a facility speciﬁcally dedicated to the growth of seedlings and
small plants equipped with advanced environmental controls for plant growth, as well as
centrifuges for setting speciﬁc gravity conditions [27].
The ﬁrst experiment carried out in the EMCS was the TROPI project, in 2006, aiming
to study the interacting effects of gravity and other stimuli, such as light, on plant growth,
to gain insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of tropisms and to better under-
stand the interaction between gravitropism and phototropism [28]. Since then, the inﬂuence
of gravity on early plant development and growth, as well as gravity perception thresholds
for species such as lentils and Arabidopsis, and, more recently, the changes in the patterns of
gene expression induced by the microgravity environment, have been studied on the ISS us-
ing the ESA’s EMCS and KUBIK incubators [29,30], NASA’s BRIC—Biological Research in
Canisters [31], ABRS—Advanced Biological Research System [32] and APEX—Advanced
Plant Experiment [33], and the JAXA’s PEU—Plant Experimental Unit [34].
All these studies have demonstrated serious alterations in the physiology and devel-
opment of seedlings and young plants grown in space. The results of the ROOT experiment
revealed that one of the most relevant effects of altered gravity is the disruption of the meris-
tematic competence in cells of the root apical meristem [26,35]. This observation means
that, under microgravity conditions, cell proliferation and cell growth appear uncoupled,
losing their coordinated progress, which is characteristic of these cells under normal ground
gravity conditions [36]. The cell proliferation rate is increased and cell growth, estimated
by the rate of production of ribosomes, the cellular factories of protein biosynthesis, is
depleted. Further complementary experiments performed on ground-based facilities for
microgravity simulation, including sequential sampling at different growth times and the
analysis of expression of some key genes of cell cycle regulation, have conﬁrmed the uncou-
pling of cell proliferation and ribosome biogenesis caused by altered gravity, showing that
microgravity induces serious alterations in the root meristem. This tissue plays a central
role in establishing developmental patterns of the plant; therefore, the alterations induced
by microgravity represent a serious compromise for plant development and, maybe, even

Life 2022, 12, 1484
4 of 17
for plant viability. Interestingly, the effects of gravitational stress are detected from the very
beginning of germination, in two-day-old seedlings [37,38].
The observations and interpretations made on root meristems from seedlings have
been conﬁrmed and demonstrated in studies performed on cells cultured in vitro and
grown in simulated microgravity. Flow cytometry analysis provided evidence for an ac-
celerated cell cycle in cells grown in the random positioning machine (RPM). The ﬁnal
acceleration was the result of a shorter G2 phase and a slightly longer G1 phase. Analysis
of gene expression showed a general downregulation of genes involved in the G2/M tran-
sition checkpoint and the upregulation of many genes controlling the G1/S transition. This
is accompanied by the downregulation of signiﬁcant genes regulating ribosome biogenesis
and by the depletion of levels of nucleolin and ﬁbrillarin, two nucleolar proteins considered
markers of this process. In addition, a general depletion of the nuclear transcription was
detected, accompanied by an increase in chromatin condensation, which was associated
with changes in enzymes involved in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression [39–41].
According to data from many studies, the factor triggering the cascade of functional events
that eventually resulted in the alteration of meristematic cell proliferation and growth
and in the disruption of meristematic competence is the phytohormone auxin [42]. This
hormone is a chief controller of the balance between cell proliferation and cell differen-
tiation existing in meristems, which is the basis of the fundamental involvement of the
meristematic tissue in plant development [43]. Moreover, auxin inﬂuences multiple aspects
of plant growth and development, including the regulation of cell cycle progression and the
coordination between cell growth and cell division [44]. From a more general perspective,
auxin regulates the connection between stimuli perceived by the plant and the cellular
responses to them [45].
The TROPI-1 experiment, the ﬁrst experiment carried out in the EMCS, produced
high-quality video downlinks of growing seedlings. It was shown that emissions with blue
light might give an increased phototropic response in the hypocotyls. In addition, a novel
positive phototropic response was observed after exposure to red light in hypocotyls and
roots developed in microgravity [46]. In a complementary experiment with shared objec-
tives, called TROPI-2, the positive phototropic curvature in hypocotyls and roots mediated
by phytochrome, observed as a response to red light, was conﬁrmed. At gravitational
accelerations ranging from 0.1 g to 0.3 g, an attenuation of red-light-based phototropism of
both roots and hypocotyls was observed [47]. Furthermore, from the frozen TROPI-2 sam-
ples returned, high-quality RNA was isolated and transcriptomic analysis was performed.
Differences in expression between spaceﬂight samples and ground controls mostly affected
genes involved in regulating cell polarity, cell wall development, oxygen status, and cell
defense or stress. These differences represent the adaptive mechanisms of plants to the
spaceﬂight environment [48].
The transcriptomic study carried out in the TROPI-2 project was part of a considerable
effort made by different research groups directed to determine the effects of spaceﬂight
on the plant genome, especially how microgravity conditions change gene and protein
expression, using advanced -omics methodologies. Various experimental approaches have
been assayed. Transcriptomic studies have used seedlings, plant organs, whole plants,
and cultured cells of different types (established lines and callus cultures) exposed to real
microgravity (spaceﬂight) or to simulated microgravity in ground-based facilities (see, for
example, [33,49–53]). Collectively, these and other studies have demonstrated the complex
responses in plants, involving reprogramming of the gene expression patterns. To date,
speciﬁc genes of responses to gravity alterations have not been found; instead, genes
known to participate in general mechanisms of the response to abiotic stresses have been
shown to modify their expression in the microgravity environment. Genes coding for heat-
shock-related elements, cell wall remodeling factors, oxidative burst intermediates, and
components of the general mechanisms of plant defense are the main and most frequent
targets of gene reprogramming induced by microgravity.

Life 2022, 12, 1484
5 of 17
3. However, Plants May Overcome Gravitational Stress and Adapt to the
Space Environment
All the aforementioned research has focused on studies of the alterations of biolog-
ical mechanisms in plants induced by the space environment. Using molecular, cellular,
and physiological methods, this has led to the conclusion that the space environment is
deleterious for normal plant life, such as it is known on Earth. However, together with this
fundamental research, mainly using model plant species such as Arabidopsis thaliana, an
alternative approach has consisted of the direct in situ production of vegetable crops on the
ISS, and their eventual use as fresh food to supplement the packaged diet of astronauts. This
has been (and still it is) a speciﬁc objective of NASA. Obviously, food crops grown in space
experience different environmental conditions (e.g., reduced gravity and elevated radiation
levels) compared with plants grown on Earth, which have been revealed as potentially
harmful to plant life. However, the ﬁrst result of this novel approach was that red romaine
lettuce was successfully grown in three tests in the Vegetable Production System (Veggie)
facility with two different harvest methods, and yields were comparable to growth on Earth.
The production and tasting of the ﬁrst “space salad” and, shortly after, the development
of a Zinnia ﬂower, received much attention from mass media all over the world, and the
ﬁrst nutritional analysis of space-grown plants has recently been published [54], showing
that lettuces grown on the ISS are nutritionally and microbiologically safe for humans. In
addition to Veggie, NASA has recently implemented the Advanced Plant Habitat (APH) on
the ISS, a more sophisticated facility with similar purposes, and complemented the Veggie
facility with the Exposed Roots On-Orbit Test System (X-ROOTS). The general purpose of
this effort is to perform compatible plant-related scientiﬁc research on ISS, using molecular,
cellular, and physiological methods, with the direct production of fresh and nutritious food
in bioregenerative life support systems (BLSSs). The ﬁnal objective is that reduced plant
growth in space can be directly translated into larger planting areas.
In addition to applications for the production of food for space explorers, these ex-
periments enable the drawing of relevant conclusions related to the physiology of plants
in microgravity. Lettuce and other crops cultured in Veggie and APH are indeed adult
plants; therefore, despite the stresses on plant growth and development caused by the space
environment, and speciﬁcally, by microgravity, plants are capable of overcoming adverse
circumstances, removing the obstacles, and achieving successful development until the
adult stage, including reproduction.
These results complement experiments speciﬁcally addressed to complete the full
life cycle of plants (seed-to-seed) in space, carried out with A. thaliana. Using advanced
growth chambers which, in general, provide a well-regulated environment for growing
plants in microgravity on the ISS, fertile adult plants have been produced from seeds
germinated in space; seeds obtained from these plants have, in turn, been germinated.
The ADVANCED ASTROCULTURE (ADVASC) experiment, consisting of two successive
experiments, was carried out in 2001–2002, in which the plant life cycle was completed [55].
A second experiment was the Japanese SPACE SEED, carried out in the Kibo module of the
ISS in 2009 [34]. It is therefore clear that plants are capable of acclimating/adapting to the
space environment. However, we currently lack knowledge of the mechanisms (cellular
or molecular) by which the adaptation takes place and eventually succeeds. Currently, a
key challenge for plant space research is to determine how and when the plant triggers
mechanisms of adaptation in order to attenuate, or even overcome, the survival problems
associated with a weightless environment.
4. Plant Culture in Space May Beneﬁt from Other Environmental Cues
Replacing Gravity
The optimization of plant growth in the microgravity environment of spaceﬂight, as
well as in any other condition of reduced gravity, could become feasible by implement-
ing the substitution of gravity by another external cue, which could play the same or a
similar role in driving plant growth and development as gravity does on Earth. Light is

Life 2022, 12, 1484
6 of 17
a good candidate to be one of these cues because it is a tropistic stimulus. Phototropism
complements gravitropism under normal ground conditions, with the objective of optimiz-
ing the efﬁciency of the capture of nutrients. In addition, illumination, especially by red
light, is sensed and mediated by phytochromes to produce changes in the regulation of
auxin-responsive genes and many growth coordinators [56]. A speciﬁc effect of red light
in the activation of speciﬁc cellular processes known to be depleted in the microgravity
environment, such as cell proliferation and ribosome biogenesis, had previously been
reported [57]. Furthermore, light is known to induce the reorganization of chromatin
architecture, as well as a global ampliﬁcation of nuclear transcription [58]. These effects
could potentially reverse the epigenetic de-activation that was found to be an effect of the
simulated microgravity in cultured cells, as mentioned above.
Interestingly, the enhancement of light signaling to compensate for the absence of
gravity was found to be a spontaneous response of plants to the lack of gravitropic stimuli
in spaceﬂight, as shown by the upregulation of genes associated with plastid functioning,
some of them closely related to photosynthesis [52]. This genetic response took place even
in etiolated seedlings, in the absence of an effective light signal. The culture of seedlings
in simulated microgravity under a photoperiod regime was capable of reverting many of
the alterations found on etiolated seedlings incubated in the same facility for microgravity
simulation [59]. Actually, light induces variable tropism in the aerial part of the plant (shoot
and leaves; hypocotyl in seedlings) and in roots. Recent experiments have shown that
seedling orientation in simulated microgravity can be improved by illuminating hypocotyls
while keeping roots in darkness, by the action of a “light avoidance” mechanism that
operates in roots [60]. This behavior, which mimics the natural situation of growing plants
in soil, can be used advantageously to improve plant culture in space.
5. The Advantages of Red Light Illumination to Improve Seedling Viability in Space,
as Revealed by the SEEDLING GROWTH Experiments
The series of three experiments, termed the SEEDLING GROWTH (SG) Project, was
conducted on the ISS (2013–2017) with the aim of ascertaining the link between light
and gravity, and of determining the combined inﬂuence of light and gravity on plant
development, at reduced gravity levels. Among other objectives, the project investigated
to what extent light could act as a signal capable of counteracting the deleterious effects
caused by the lack of gravity. Speciﬁcally, we aimed to explore if, and to what extent,
speciﬁc light conditions could be applied to modulate the alterations caused by the lack of
gravity on plant growth and development, thus facilitating the adaptation of plants to the
space environment.
The project consisted of three phases, termed SG1, SG2, and SG3, each performed
in different spaceﬂights to the ISS, or ISS increments, between 2013 and 2017. The last
experiment was the Ground Reference Control, carried out in 2018. This project was
the result of the cooperation of NASA and ESA, using a European incubator (European
Modular Cultivation System, EMCS) [27] equipped with two centrifuges, enabling control
of the gravity level. The use of this spaceﬂight incubator was combined with culture
chambers for the incubation of seeds and the growth of seedlings developed by NASA,
and termed “TROPI cassettes” [28], and with a novel device, called FixBox, speciﬁcally
designed and built in Europe for the chemical ﬁxation of samples within cassettes to
allow their microscopical examination postﬂight [61]. Different collections of mutants
of Arabidopsis thaliana, affecting phytochromes, nucleolar proteins, and auxin-responsive
genes were used, as well as the DII-Venus reporter line for the visualization of auxin
localization [62]. Depending on the speciﬁc mutants, the corresponding wild-type ecotypes
were Landsberg erecta (Ler), for the phytochrome mutants, and Columbia (Col-0) for all
the other mutants and lines. Seeds germinated in-ﬂight and grew for six days under
different regimens of illumination and gravity. In addition to microgravity existing in
space, seedlings were subjected to different levels of gravity between microgravity and 1 g,
including Moon and Mars gravity levels, achieved with the on-board EMCS centrifuges.

Life 2022, 12, 1484
7 of 17
In the SG1 and SG2 experiments, phytochrome mutants (phyA and phyB) and Ler wild-
type seeds were germinated after hydration. Seedlings were initially grown at 1 g under
white light for 96 h with the purpose of establishing a robust growth axis, followed by
unidirectional (lateral) photostimulation for 48 h with red light, blue light, or red followed
by blue light, under six gravity conditions: microgravity, 0.1 g, 0.3 g, 0.5 g, 0.8 g, and
1.0 g. Videorecording during the photostimulation phase enabled the identiﬁcation of
new phototropic responses to blue light in space, which complement ﬁndings obtained in
previous TROPI I and II experiments [63].
Blue light is a known source of phototropic stimulus on Earth [64]. In plants grown
in space under phototropic stimulation with blue light and under different gravity levels,
which were preserved by ultra-freezing (−80 ◦C) and returned to Earth, a global tran-
scriptomic study provided a very clear differential transcriptional response to each gravity
level, from microgravity to 1 g. In the case of the microgravity-exposed plants, functions
associated with light sensing and response, such as photosynthesis and related factors,
appeared to be downregulated with respect to 1 g controls, suggesting that the growth
was not following the phototropic environmental cue in the absence of the gravitropic cue.
This observation would mean that gravity responses inﬂuence plant development under
exposure to directional blue light. [65]. A similar analysis performed under the different
levels of gravity mentioned above, including those corresponding to the Moon and Mars,
showed that the effects induced by microgravity, especially those affecting plastid-related
genes, were gradually removed by increasing the g-load, and that different functions ap-
peared to be affected at different g-levels. However, a strong general abiotic stress response
was detected at levels lower than the Moon gravity (lower than 0.1 g), probably due to the
conﬂuence of different altered stimuli at the detection threshold of photo- and gravi-sensing
mechanisms, which could cause conﬂicting responses. At higher g-levels, the alteration
became progressively weaker [66]. In general, blue light phototropism was found to be
capable of reducing the gravitational stress response in spaceﬂight.
The effect of red light on Ler wild-type samples grown with the same protocol de-
scribed above was investigated in roots by selecting marker genes for cell growth and
proliferation and analyzing their differential expression under different conditions of grav-
ity and light using qPCR. The results showed a positive effect of photoactivation with
this wavelength in counteracting the stress caused by spaceﬂight in the root meristem,
which had previously been identiﬁed and described. In these conditions, marker genes
for cell proliferation, cell growth, and auxin polar transport showed a concerted upregu-
lation [67]. Therefore, unilateral illumination with red light during the last two days of
culture in microgravity on the ISS, after four days of growth under white light at 1 g, was
capable of reverting, totally or partially, the alterations caused by microgravity on the root
meristem. This included re-establishing meristematic competence and auxin transport. A
parallel study on the ground using simulated microgravity (RPM) conﬁrmed the spaceﬂight
data [67].
In additional experiments of the series (SG2 and SG3), Col-0 seedlings and mutants
were grown for 4 days under illumination with a photoperiod (16 h white light/8 h dark)
and were then photostimulated with directional red light for two days. Control samples
were kept in darkness for this period. Seedlings grew either in microgravity, at 0.3 g (a
gravity level near that of Mars which was obtained with the centrifuge installed in the
EMCS), and at 1 g (ﬂight control), also produced by the rotating centrifuge. The effects of
light and gravity on the growth of seedlings were noted on images taken after the 4-day
period of growth and after the 6th day, including red light photostimulation (Figure 1).

Life 2022, 12, 1484
8 of 17
Figure 1. Images of Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type (Col-0) seedlings grown on the ISS in the Seedling
Growth-3 (SG3) experiment. Seeds were afﬁxed to a black gridded membrane (the distance between
the grid lines on the membrane was 3 mm) and hydrated to promote germination. Upper row:
seedlings grown for 4 days under a white light photoperiod (16 h/8 h). The light source was
positioned in the upper part of the images. Different levels of gravity were applied using the
centrifuges installed in the EMCS facility, namely, microgravity (micro-g), near-Mars gravity (0.3 g),
and Earth gravity (1 g). Notably, in all cases, white light was capable of determining the orientation of
hypocotyls; however, the orientation of roots depended on the level of gravity. Lower row: seedlings
grown for two additional days under continuous unilateral illumination with red light. The light
source was positioned at the left side of the images. Red light was not capable, per se, of inducing
orientation of seedlings, as shown in the microgravity image; only a few seedlings appeared to orient
their root tips towards the light source. However, partial gravity, as well as Earth gravity levels, were
sufﬁcient to produce the seedling orientation according to the gravity vector.
Regarding wild-type seedlings, illumination in the photoperiod showed a differential
effect on hypocotyls and roots. Under microgravity, hypocotyls appeared generally oriented
towards the light source, showing little differences with the orientation exhibited by control
seedlings grown at 1 g. In contrast, light did not appear to inﬂuence the orientation of
roots in microgravity, which showed considerable differences with the oriented roots of
seedlings grown at 1 g (Figure 1). These features are in agreement with the results of
experiments performed in simulated microgravity [59]. Photoactivation with directional
red light suppressed the orientation of hypocotyls achieved under white light. In general,
seedlings appeared randomly oriented, although the effect was stronger in seedlings
located closer to the red light source, whereas seedlings placed further from light preserved
some orientation (Figure 1). Red light phototropism, described in the roots of seedlings
grown in microgravity [46], was weak; thus, it was difﬁcult to observe when the starting
point was disoriented roots. Nevertheless, signs of this root tropism could be detected
in some seedlings (Figure 1). The images of seedlings grown at 0.3 g were especially
signiﬁcant, because they showed seedlings almost totally oriented in their hypocotyls and
roots according to the partial gravity vector. This orientation, very similar to the result
of growth at 1 g, was not suppressed by red light, indicating that it was a clear effect of
this level of gravity (Figure 1). Thus, the gravity vector existing at the surface of Mars is
capable, per se, of inducing a positive gravitropism in the roots of A. thaliana. This ﬁnding
could be relevant to realizing the culture of plants on the Red Planet.
A full-genome global transcriptomic analysis of red-light-photostimulated plants
versus plants grown in darkness was performed on samples grown in the SG2 spaceﬂight
experiment. A speciﬁc purpose of this analysis was to ﬁnd answers to two relevant
questions: (a) Is red light irradiation capable of reverting the pattern of gene expression
under microgravity to a pattern closer to that of control 1 g conditions?; and (b) Is red light
irradiation capable of counteracting gravitational stress? Transcriptomic data were analyzed
using a bioinformatics tool called Gene Expression Dynamic Inspector (GEDI v2.1) [68].
The GEDI proﬁle enabled visualization of the gene expression across the transcriptome,

Life 2022, 12, 1484
9 of 17
generating a mosaic image or dot matrix, using a self-organizing map algorithm [68].
GEDI creates clusters of genes that share dynamic expression patterns, irrespective of gene
ontology or cellular function. The output of GEDI is a characteristic mosaic or GEDI Map, a
color-coded two-dimensional grid image (20 × 16 pixels) for each sample (Figure 2a). Each
tile in the mosaic (each pixel) represents a cluster of genes that share a similar transcriptional
proﬁle in any experimental condition. The color of each tile indicates the relative expression
of the genes in that cluster. Finally, clusters of similarly expressing genes are placed in
the same neighborhood on the grid, creating an image that enables global transcriptome
analysis as a single entity for display in different conditions.
Global patterns of the gene expression of seedlings grown for six days in the different
conditions of the SG2 experiment, represented as GEDI maps, allowed the comparison of
the effects of gravity and red light photoactivation (Figure 2a). The upper row shows the
patterns obtained for the full genome (22,719 genes analyzed). The pattern of seedlings
grown at 1 g under red light photoactivation was signiﬁcantly changed in seedlings grown
in microgravity and not photoactivated. Interestingly, the pattern was reversed under
microgravity when samples were photoactivated, indicating a possible effect of red light
in compensation of the alterations induced by microgravity (Figure 2a). Unfortunately,
the samples in darkness and at 1g were lost during processing on the ISS and could not
be incorporated in the analysis. If the same comparison was restricted to the set of genes
showing differential expression in microgravity versus ground gravity (12,950 genes), differ-
ences in the pattern were increased and the reversion induced by red light in microgravity
was only partial (Figure 2a).
Transcriptomic data were subjected to gene ontology (GO) analysis in order to identify
the functions especially altered by the different conditions and to differentiate downreg-
ulated and upregulated genes (Figure 2b). The results of this analysis were compared,
ﬁrst under constant microgravity, between red light photoactivation and darkness, and
then under constant red light photoactivation, between microgravity and ground gravity.
Differences in gene expression, caused by either up- or downregulation, in the different
ontology groups were much greater in the ﬁrst case than in the second case (Figure 2b).
The interpretation was that red light photoactivation attenuated the differences in gene
expression induced by microgravity. Under constant microgravity, there was a profound
difference in gene expression between photoactivated and non-photoactivated samples, but
red light illumination signiﬁcantly mitigated the differences caused by the gravity change
(Figure 2b).

Life 2022, 12, 1484
10 of 17
Figure 2. Analysis of the transcriptomic data obtained from samples grown in the Seedling Growth-2
(SG2) experiment on the ISS. Seedlings were grown for 4 days under a white light photoperiod
(16 h/8 h), and were then either photoactivated with continuous unidirectional red light for an
additional 2 days, or kept in darkness. (a) Global transcriptomic patterns obtained with the bioin-
formatic tool called Gene Expression Dynamic Inspector (GEDI) of Col-0 wild-type samples grown
under different conditions. Genes showing similar degrees of expression were treated together,
attributed a color code, and are presented as a tile or pixel in the diagram. Upper row: full genome.
Lower row: differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in microgravity, with respect to 1 g. The pattern
signiﬁcantly changed from red-light-1 g conditions to dark-micro-g conditions, but it was reverted in
micro-g with red light photoactivation. Reversion was higher for the full genome than for DEGs only.
(b) Comparison of the transcriptomic effects of a change in illumination, at constant micro-g (left),
and of a change in g at constant red light (right). Diagrams show the percentages of upregulated and
downregulated genes in the different ontology groups. (c): GEDI maps, under different conditions of
light and gravity, of the comparison in gene expression of the Col-0 wild-type and the nuc2 mutant,
defective in a gene participating in the stress response mechanisms. Differences in gene expression
between the two genotypes in each condition were used to estimate the stress of this condition.

Life 2022, 12, 1484
11 of 17
In these studies, we also used mutants of the nucleolar protein nucleolin, a multifunc-
tional protein that plays key roles in the regulation of the fundamental cellular process of
ribosome biogenesis, at multiple steps [69]. The genome of Arabidopsis thaliana encodes
two genes for nucleolin, called NUC1 and NUC2. From these two nucleolin genes, one of
them, NUC2, is known to participate in the mechanisms of adaptive responses to different
stresses [70]. We took advantage of this feature to evaluate the role of red light photoactiva-
tion in the attenuation or mitigation of stress caused by microgravity on seedlings. For this
purpose, we analyzed differences in the patterns of gene expression, expressed as GEDI
maps, between the Col-0 wild type and the nuc2 mutant, under different conditions of
gravity and light in spaceﬂight. The differences in response between the two genotypes
should be attributed to the role played by the Nuc2 protein in the stress response, because
normal expression of the NUC1 gene should be sufﬁcient to ensure normal regulation of ri-
bosome biogenesis. Under 1 g ground gravity and red light photoactivation, the GEDI map
revealed very minor differences in gene expression between the two compared genotypes
(Figure 2c). These conditions were not identiﬁed as stressful; therefore, there was no need
for triggering the mechanisms of stress response mediated by the Nuc2 protein. For this
reason, the presence or absence of the NUC2 gene was irrelevant for the global pattern of
gene expression. In contrast, microgravity and no photoactivation by red light were identi-
ﬁed as stress-generating conditions in cells, capable of triggering the mechanisms of stress
response in which the Nuc2 protein is involved. Consequently, the presence or absence
of the NUC2 gene greatly affected this response. The result was a signiﬁcant difference in
the global pattern of gene expression, revealed by the GEDI map, between the Col-0 wild
type, in which the NUC2 gene is expressed, and the nuc2 mutant, which does not express
this gene (Figure 2c). These differences in gene expression were considerably attenuated
under microgravity and red light photoactivation in spaceﬂight, although the GEDI map
of the comparison was not totally reversed to the pattern indicative of a full absence of
stress (Figure 2c). The conclusion was that red light photoactivation could signiﬁcantly
contribute to realizing the adaptation of plants to the microgravity environment; therefore,
it could be used to improve the culture of plants in space.
These results were conﬁrmed and extended by a complementary analysis of the
nucleolin mutants nuc1 and nuc2, together with the Col-0 wild type, which was performed
using samples grown in the SG3 experiment. In parallel, the response of these genotypes
to red light photoactivation was investigated under 1 g ground gravity [71]. The basis of
these studies was the ﬁnding that plant nucleolin gene expression is upregulated by red
light on Earth [57]. A global transcriptomic study performed on the ground using WT
and both nuc1 and nuc2 mutant lines, comparing conditions of red light photoactivation
for two days versus darkness, revealed that illumination at this wavelength enhanced
the capability of the NUC2 gene to replace the functions of NUC1 in ribosome biogenesis
and cell cycle, when this gene was knocked out in the nuc1 mutant. In addition, in the
nuc2 mutant, photoactivation induced an increase in differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
belonging to functional groups associated with stress responses. This means that the NUC2
gene may counteract the environmental stress produced by darkness in nuc1 seedlings,
although nuc2 seedlings cannot develop a full response to red light [71].
Furthermore, the analysis of these samples grown in spaceﬂight (SG3) comprised, ﬁrst,
a phenotypic analysis including morphometric parameters of seedlings during develop-
ment in space in combination with microscopical studies of the root meristems on samples
ﬁxed in orbit [61]. Study at the cellular level of the cell cycle and ribosome biogenesis in
root meristematic cells resulted in values closer to the 1 g control in samples stimulated with
red light. Then, gene expression alterations were evaluated by RNAseq. The nuc2 mutant
showed differential requirements in response to red light photoactivation and exhibited
normal development in space by changing the expression of a smaller number of genes
than the wild type, i.e., with reduced requirements in the number of DEGs, which could
mean a better capacity than the wild type for adaptation to a microgravity environment.
Therefore, a mutant line with this attenuated response may constitute an advantage to

Life 2022, 12, 1484
12 of 17
be taken into account when selecting the most productive plant varieties for life support
systems, and opens the way to directed-mutagenesis strategies in crop design to be used in
space colonization scenarios (Manzano et al., 2022, submitted for publication).
In addition, the localization of nuclear proteins and auxin distribution were analyzed
by confocal and electron microscopy, in studies that were also performed on SG3 samples
ﬁxed in space on the ISS. Confocal microscopic images of the root tips of seedlings of the
DII-Venus reporter line of A. thaliana showed an altered pattern of auxin distribution in
seedlings grown in microgravity with respect to the 1 g control, indicative of some inhibition
of the auxin polar transport. This ﬁnding conﬁrmed previous experiments on simulated
microgravity [72]. In contrast, the pattern of roots grown at 0.3 g was basically similar to
the control pattern, indicating that auxin polar transport was not altered at these partial-g
levels [73]. This is in agreement with the images of seedlings grown for six days on the ISS
under this level of gravity (near-Mars g), showing that roots and hypocotyls appeared to
be oriented following the direction of the gravity vector (Figure 1) and, consequently, that
normal gravitropism was operating at these levels of gravity.
Samples of the Col-0 wild-type ecotype, grown in the SG3 experiment, were also
analyzed by confocal and electron microscopy, together with transcriptomic analysis, to
obtain additional data on the response of seedlings to microgravity and Mars gravity levels
and on the effects of red light photostimulation at these two gravity levels, compared with
1 g ground gravity [74]. The cellular analysis was focused on root meristematic cells. Red
light increased meristem and nucleolar size, as observed in the confocal microscopy images.
In addition, ultrastructural analysis of meristematic cell nucleoli showed more active
nucleoli in the red-light-photostimulated seedlings, as shown by the relative distribution of
the nucleolar subcomponents, according to previously described models of the nucleolar
structure in relation to activity [75,76]. This observation suggests that red light indeed
counteracts the decoupling between cell proliferation and growth, as reported in the
aforementioned prior experiments in space and simulated microgravity [35,37].
The transcriptomic RNA-seq analysis, globally considered, showed, as expected, that
microgravity has a considerable impact on the transcriptome in A. thaliana seedlings. How-
ever, interestingly, partial gravity inﬂuences the transcriptome differently from microgravity.
Red light photostimulation modulates the response to microgravity and also to partial
gravity, producing a clear attenuation of the functional changes induced by altered gravity.
Speciﬁcally, the transcriptomic analysis of phytohormone signaling indicated an activation
of proliferation-promoting pathways in microgravity, such as cytokinin and auxin [74].
Cytokinin alterations in spaceﬂight were reported previously [77], and the changes in auxin
polar transport in the different conditions of light and gravity, as detected in situ with the
reporter line DII-Venus, are discussed above.
An important result of this analysis was observation of the downregulation of photo-
synthetic functions in red-light-photostimulated seedlings in microgravity, but not at the
Mars gravity level [74]. This result was also obtained from seedlings grown in microgravity
and photostimulated with blue light in the course of the SG1 experiment [65]. In both cases,
the GO analysis exhibited downregulation in PSI and PSII, the photosynthetic electron
transport chain, and chlorophyll metabolism. In addition, overexpression of the plastid
and the mitochondrial genome was observed in microgravity.
Overexpression of the plastid genes had previously been interpreted as an attempt by
the seedlings to enhance light signaling to compensate for the lack of gravity in dark-grown
seedlings [52]. However, this overexpression was recorded at different light conditions, and
it was indeed more pronounced in red-light-photostimulated seedlings than in seedlings
that were kept in the dark. This observation indicated that this effect was not exclusive for
etiolated seedlings [74]. The downregulation of photosynthesis functions in seedlings with
red or blue light photostimulation could, in fact, be a result of altered plastid function due
to alterations in nuclear–organelle communication. These alterations in nuclear–organelle
communication could account for the elevated plastid and mitochondrial genome expres-
sion, which was only observed in microgravity conditions, both in darkness and under red

Life 2022, 12, 1484
13 of 17
light photoactivation. There are two types of nucleus–organelle communication, namely,
anterograde (nucleus-to-organelle signaling) and retrograde (organelle-to-nucleus signal-
ing). The dysregulation could take place in either of them: anterograde if the nucleus
response does not reach the organelles; retrograde if the nucleus does not perceive the
upregulation of plastid and mitochondrial genome expression [78].
However, the Mars gravity level corrected these effects and promoted an adaptive
response, with the upregulation of genes of hormone pathways associated with the stress
response (abscisic acid, ethylene, and salicylic acid). Furthermore, the upregulation of
environmental-acclimation-related transcription factors (WRKY and NACs families) [79,80]
was also observed, especially in samples photostimulated with red light, suggesting that
seedlings grown in partial gravity levels are able to acclimate by modulating genome
expression in routes activated to cope with space-environment-associated stress [74]. Strik-
ingly, samples grown at near-Mars g (0.3 g) showed signiﬁcant alterations in gene expres-
sion, more than expected in view of the data obtained in the SG1 experiment, as noted
above [65,66]. There are differences between the two sets of samples (SG1 and SG3), which
could be due to the different results, namely, ecotype, light conditions, and time of exposure
to altered gravity, among others. Despite the differences, the Mars gravity level was found
to cause a more adaptive response than microgravity on SG3 samples. In addition, the
upregulation of WRKY transcription factors at the Mars gravity level showed that adaptive
mechanisms were activated [74].
Collectively considered, the results showed a differential response to each gravity level,
triggering different adaptive responses, involving changes in the regulation of different
sets of genes. These changes in gene expression were more reduced under Mars gravity
than under microgravity conditions. In all cases, the adaptive response appeared to be
enhanced by red light photostimulation.
6. Conclusions and Future Prospects
The SG series of experiments has constituted a signiﬁcant contribution to furthering the
knowledge of alterations induced by the space environment, speciﬁcally by microgravity
and different levels of partial gravity, on the physiology of plants. Investigations have
focused on the earliest stages of plant development, and a variety of cellular and molecular
(transcriptomic) parameters have been studied. Among the key ﬁndings of our spaceﬂight
project are the new results on phototropism induced by red and blue light illumination,
the effect of red light illumination in counteracting the adverse effects of altered gravity,
and the discovery that Moon gravity could trigger more severe transcriptomic responses
than spaceﬂight. However, we also observed that Mars gravity is capable of inducing the
gravitropic orientation of roots, and the different responses to the space environment of
the various mutants used, suggesting that the selection of plants for their culture in alien
environments should require prior detailed analysis of their genotypes in order to select
the varieties capable of adapting better.
The SG experiments have been among the ﬁrst in performing a comparative analysis,
using microgravity, different levels of partial gravity (including Moon and Mars gravity),
and an on-board 1 g control in ﬂight. This has been possible due to the use of the EMCS
incubator, equipped with centrifuges providing this capacity. Unfortunately, the EMCS
was decommissioned in 2018 and not replaced by any other spaceﬂight facility with these
exact capabilities. The novel advanced NASA incubators for plant culture, Veggie, APH,
and X-ROOTS, do not allow for these comparative studies at different gravity levels, which
are of the highest importance.
In the immediate future, in our next studies, we should incorporate other space
environmental factor that, along with gravity, is key to the survival of living beings and
particularly of plants: radiation. Fortunately, there are experiments under development
in different laboratories, including ours, and different devices and facilities providing the
simultaneous application of radiation and different levels of simulated microgravity and
partial gravity for experimental analyses.

Life 2022, 12, 1484
14 of 17
In addition, we need to extend the cellular and molecular studies on plant adaptation
to the space environment, such as SG, to the use of crop species. NASA is actively promoting
plant studies on the ISS using the aforementioned spaceﬂight incubators Veggie, APH, and
X-ROOTS, but this activity is basically oriented to nutritional aspects, without giving the
necessary priority to fundamental studies at cellular and molecular level. Surprisingly,
the activity of ESA in plant biology studies has been relatively slow after completion
of the SG project. Obviously, the decommission of EMCS, an ESA facility, has been an
important factor, but not the only one. There is an ongoing project to adapt the Biolab, a
seriously underused spaceﬂight facility, to plant experiments of this type. It is vital that
Europe regains the initiative in this research area as soon as possible, and thus again being
able to play a relevant role in meeting the need for an effective culture of plants in space.
Nowadays, this need, as a key human life support mechanism in space exploration, is
becoming more and more urgent.
Author Contributions: F.-J.M. wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript, which was edited by A.M., R.H.
and J.Z.K. The ﬁnal version was agreed by all co-authors. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The research performed in the authors’ laboratory was supported by different grants of the
Spanish National Agency for Research of the Spanish Government, e.g., Grants #ESP2015-64323-R and
#RTI2018-099309-B-I00 (co-funded by EU-ERDF), and also by a grant from NASA (#80NSSC17K0546).
Access to the ISS was made possible by ESA and NASA, and the use of ground-based facilities for
microgravity simulation was supported by the ESA-CORA-GBF Program.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data are available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: We would like to express our gratitude to astronauts, technicians, engineers,
and management personnel who participated in our spaceﬂight and ground-based experiments.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
NASA; CSA; ESA; JAXA; ROSCOSMOS; ASI. International Space Station. Beneﬁts for Humanity, 3rd ed.; NASA NP-2018-06-013-JSC;
Robinson, J., Costello, K., Eds.; NASA: Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
2.
Rinaldi, A. Research in space: In search of meaning. EMBO Rep. 2016, 17, 1098–1102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Voosen, P. NASA Curiosity rover hits organic pay dirt on Mars. Science 2018, 360, 1054–1055. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Häder, D.-P.; Braun, M.; Hemmersbach, R. Bioregenerative Life Support Systems in space research. In Gravitational Biology I:
Gravity Sensing and Graviorientation in Microorganisms and Plants; Ruyters, G., Braun, M., Eds.; Springer International Publishing:
Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 113–122.
5.
Lasseur, C.; Brunet, J.; de Weever, H.; Dixon, M.; Dussap, G.; Godia, F.; Leys, N.; Mergeay, M.; Van Der Straeten, D. MELiSSA: The
European project of closed life support system. Gravit. Space Biol. 2010, 23, 3–12.
6.
Wheeler, R.M. Agriculture for space: People and places paving the way. Open Agric. 2017, 2, 14. [CrossRef]
7.
Medina, F.J. Space explorers need to be space farmers: What we know and what we need to know about plant growth in space.
Mètode Sci. Stud. J.-Annu. Rev. 2021, 11, 55–62. [CrossRef]
8.
Wamelink, G.W.; Frissel, J.Y.; Krijnen, W.H.; Verwoert, M.R.; Goedhart, P.W. Can plants grow on Mars and the moon: A growth
experiment on Mars and moon soil simulants. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e103138. [CrossRef]
9.
Paul, A.-L.; Elardo, S.M.; Ferl, R. Plants grown in Apollo lunar regolith present stress-associated transcriptomes that inform
prospects for lunar exploration. Commun. Biol. 2022, 5, 382. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10.
Beischer, D.E.; Fregly, A.R. Animals and Man in Space: A Chronology and Annotated Bibliography, through the Year 1960; US Naval
School of Aviation Medicine, US Naval Aviation Medical Center: Atlanta, GA, USA, 1962; Volume 5.
11.
Harvey, B.; Zakutnyaya, O. Russian Space Probes: Scientiﬁc Discoveries and Future Missions; Springer Science & Business Me-
dia/Praxis Publishing: Chichester, UK, 2011.
12.
Zabel, P.; Bamsey, M.; Schubert, D.; Tajmar, M. Review and analysis of over 40 years of space plant growth systems. Life Sci. Space
Res. 2016, 10, 1–16. [CrossRef]
13.
Vandenbrink, J.P.; Kiss, J.Z. Space, the ﬁnal frontier: A critical review of recent experiments performed in microgravity. Plant Sci.
2016, 243, 115–119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Life 2022, 12, 1484
15 of 17
14.
Kiss, J.Z.; Wolverton, C.; Wyatt, S.E.; Hasenstein, K.H.; van Loon, J.J.W.A. Comparison of microgravity analogs to spaceﬂight in
studies of plant growth and development. Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 1577. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Herranz, R.; Anken, R.; Boonstra, J.; Braun, M.; Christianen, P.C.M.; de Geest, M.; Hauslage, J.; Hilbig, R.; Hill, R.J.A.; Lebert, M.;
et al. Ground-based facilities for simulation of microgravity: Organism-speciﬁc recommendations for their use, and recommended
terminology. Astrobiology 2013, 13, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Medina, F.J.; Herranz, R.; Arena, C.; Aronne, G.; De Micco, V. Growing plants under generated extra-terrestrial environments:
Effects of altered gravity and radiation. In Generation and Applications of Extra-Terrestrial Environments on Earth; Beysens, D., Van
Loon, J.J.W.A., Eds.; River Publishers: Delft, The Netherlands, 2015; pp. 239–254.
17.
Van Loon, J.J.W.A. Centrifuges for microgravity simulation. The reduced gravity paradigm. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 2016, 3, 21.
[CrossRef]
18.
Schmidt, W. Gravity induced absorption changes in Phycomyces blakesleanus and coleoptiles of Zea mays as measured on the Drop
Tower in Bremen (FRG). Microgravity Sci. Technol. 2010, 22, 79–85. [CrossRef]
19.
Pletser, V. European aircraft parabolic ﬂights for microgravity research, applications and exploration: A review. Reach 2016, 1,
11–19. [CrossRef]
20.
Hauslage, J.; Görög, M.; Krause, L.; Schüler, O.; Schäfer, M.; Witten, A.; Kesseler, L.; Böhmer, M.; Hemmersbach, R.
ARABIDOMICS—A new experimental platform for molecular analyses of plants in drop towers, on parabolic ﬂights, and
sounding rockets. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 2020, 91, 034504. [CrossRef]
21.
Merkys, A.J.; Laurinavicius, R.S.; Svegzdiene, D.V. Plant growth, development and embryogenesis during Salyut-7 ﬂight. Adv
Space Res. 1984, 4, 55–63. [CrossRef]
22.
Halstead, T.W.; Dutcher, F.R. Plants in space. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 1987, 38, 317–345. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Manzano, A.; Carnero-Diaz, E.; Herranz, R.; Medina, F.J. Recent transcriptomic studies to elucidate the plant adaptive response to
spaceﬂight and to simulated space environments. iScience 2022, 25, 104687. [CrossRef]
24.
Tixador, R.; Rafﬁn, J.; Richoilley, G.; Kordium, V.A.; Kojarinov, V.; Maneko, G. Ampoule de verre cassable contenant un liquide
sous pression, éjectable en totalité‚ lors de la cassure de l’ampoule. Brevet B. 148 No. 8007471. Innov. Tech. Biol. Med. 1981, 2,
12–14.
25.
Brinckmann, E.; Brillouet, C. Biorack on Spacehab, SP-1222; ESA Publication Division ESTEC: Noordwijk, The Netherlands, 1999.
26.
Matía, I.; González-Camacho, F.; Marco, R.; Kiss, J.Z.; Gasset, G.; Medina, F.J. Nucleolar structure and proliferation activity of
Arabidopsis root cells from seedlings germinated on the International Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 2005, 36, 1244–1253. [CrossRef]
27.
Brinckmann, E. ESA hardware for plant research on the International Space Station. Adv. Space Res. 2005, 36, 1162–1166. [CrossRef]
28.
Kiss, J.Z.; Kumar, P.; Millar, K.D.L.; Edelmann, R.E.; Correll, M.J. Operations of a spaceﬂight experiment to investigate plant
tropisms. Adv. Space Res. 2009, 44, 879–886. [CrossRef]
29.
Kittang, A.-I.; Iversen, T.-H.; Fossum, K.R.; Mazars, C.; Carnero-Diaz, E.; Boucheron-Dubuisson, E.; Le Disquet, I.; Legué, V.;
Herranz, R.; Pereda-Loth, V.; et al. Exploration of plant growth and development using the European Modular Cultivation
System facility on the International Space Station. Plant Biol. 2014, 16, 528–538. [CrossRef]
30.
Bizet, F.; Pereda-Loth, V.; Chauvet, H.; Gérard, J.; Eche, B.; Girousse, C.; Courtade, M.; Perbal, G.; Legué, V. Both gravistimulation
onset and removal trigger an increase of cytoplasmic free calcium in statocytes of roots grown in microgravity. Sci. Rep. 2018,
8, 11442. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Paul, A.-L.; Zupanska, A.K.; Ostrow, D.T.; Zhang, Y.; Sun, Y.; Li, J.-L.; Shanker, S.; Farmerie, W.G.; Amalﬁtano, C.E.; Ferl, R.J.
Spaceﬂight transcriptomes: Unique responses to a novel environment. Astrobiology 2012, 12, 40–56. [CrossRef]
32.
Paul, A.-L.; Zupanska, A.; Schultz, E.; Ferl, R. Organ-speciﬁc remodeling of the Arabidopsis transcriptome in response to spaceﬂight.
BMC Plant Biol. 2013, 13, 112. [CrossRef]
33.
Califar, B.; Sng, N.J.; Zupanska, A.; Paul, A.-L.; Ferl, R.J. Root skewing-associated genes impact the spaceﬂight response of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 11, 239. [CrossRef]
34.
Yano, S.; Kasahara, H.; Masuda, D.; Tanigaki, F.; Shimazu, T.; Suzuki, H.; Karahara, I.; Soga, K.; Hoson, T.; Tayama, I.; et al.
Improvements in and actual performance of the Plant Experiment Unit onboard Kibo, the Japanese experiment module on the
international space station. Adv. Space Res. 2013, 51, 780–788. [CrossRef]
35.
Matía, I.; González-Camacho, F.; Herranz, R.; Kiss, J.Z.; Gasset, G.; van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Marco, R.; Medina, F.J. Plant cell
proliferation and growth are altered by microgravity conditions in spaceﬂight. J. Plant Physiol. 2010, 167, 184–193. [CrossRef]
36.
Mizukami, Y. A matter of size: Developmental control of organ size in plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2001, 4, 533–539. [CrossRef]
37.
Manzano, A.I.; Larkin, O.; Dijkstra, C.; Anthony, P.; Davey, M.; Eaves, L.; Hill, R.; Herranz, R.; Medina, F.J. Meristematic cell
proliferation and ribosome biogenesis are decoupled in diamagnetically levitated Arabidopsis seedlings. BMC Plant Biol. 2013, 13,
124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Boucheron-Dubuisson, E.; Manzano, A.I.; Le Disquet, I.; Matía, I.; Sáez-Vasquez, J.; van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Herranz, R.; Carnero-Diaz,
E.; Medina, F.J. Functional alterations of root meristematic cells of Arabidopsis thaliana induced by a simulated microgravity
environment. J. Plant Physiol. 2016, 207, 30–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Kamal, K.Y.; Herranz, R.; van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Medina, F.J. Cell cycle acceleration and changes in essential nuclear functions
induced by simulated microgravity in a synchronized Arabidopsis cell culture. Plant Cell Environ. 2019, 42, 480–494. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

Life 2022, 12, 1484
16 of 17
40.
Kamal, K.Y.; van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Medina, F.J.; Herranz, R. Differential transcriptional proﬁle through cell cycle progression in
Arabidopsis cultures under simulated microgravity. Genomics 2019, 111, 1956–1965. [CrossRef]
41.
Kamal, K.Y.; Herranz, R.; van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Medina, F.J. Simulated microgravity, Mars gravity, and 2g hypergravity affect cell
cycle regulation, ribosome biogenesis, and epigenetics in Arabidopsis cell cultures. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 6424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Medina, F.J.; Herranz, R. Microgravity environment uncouples cell growth and cell proliferation in root meristematic cells: The
mediator role of auxin. Plant Signal. Behav. 2010, 5, 176–179. [CrossRef]
43.
Perrot-Rechenmann, C. Cellular responses to auxin: Division versus expansion. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2010, 2, a001446.
[CrossRef]
44.
David, K.M.; Couch, D.; Braun, N.; Brown, S.; Grosclaude, J.; Perrot-Rechenmann, C. The auxin-binding protein 1 is essential for
the control of cell cycle. Plant J. 2007, 50, 197–206. [CrossRef]
45.
Muday, G.K.; Murphy, A.S. An emerging model of auxin transport regulation. Plant Cell 2002, 14, 293–299. [CrossRef]
46.
Millar, K.D.L.; Kumar, P.; Correll, M.J.; Mullen, J.L.; Hangarter, R.P.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z. A novel phototropic response to
red light is revealed in microgravity. New Phytol. 2010, 186, 648–656. [CrossRef]
47.
Kiss, J.Z.; Millar, K.D.L.; Edelmann, R.E. Phototropism of Arabidopsis thaliana in microgravity and fractional gravity on the
International Space Station. Planta 2012, 236, 635–645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Correll, M.J.; Pyle, T.P.; Millar, K.D.L.; Sun, Y.; Yao, J.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z. Transcriptome analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana
seedlings grown in space: Implications for gravity-responsive genes. Planta 2013, 238, 519–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49.
Zupanska, A.K.; LeFrois, C.; Ferl, R.J.; Paul, A.-L. HSFA2 functions in the physiological adaptation of undifferentiated plant cells
to spaceﬂight. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 390. [CrossRef]
50.
Schüler, O.; Hemmersbach, R.; Böhmer, M. A bird’s-eye view of molecular changes in plant gravitropism using omics techniques.
Front. Plant Sci. 2015, 6, 1176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Angelos, E.; Kwan Ko, D.; Zemelis-Durfee, S.; Brandizzi, F. Relevance of the unfolded protein response to spaceﬂight-induced
transcriptional reprogramming in Arabidopsis. Astrobiology 2021, 21, 367–380. [CrossRef]
52.
Kruse, C.P.S.; Meyers, A.D.; Basu, P.; Hutchinson, S.; Luesse, D.R.; Wyatt, S.E. Spaceﬂight induces novel regulatory responses in
Arabidopsis seedling as revealed by combined proteomic and transcriptomic analyses. BMC Plant Biol. 2020, 20, 237. [CrossRef]
53.
Johnson, C.M.; Subramanian, A.; Pattathil, S.; Correll, M.J.; Kiss, J.Z. Comparative transcriptomics indicate changes in cell wall
organization and stress response in seedlings during spaceﬂight. Am. J. Bot. 2017, 104, 1219–1231. [CrossRef]
54.
Khodadad, C.L.M.; Hummerick, M.E.; Spencer, L.E.; Dixit, A.R.; Richards, J.T.; Romeyn, M.W.; Smith, T.M.; Wheeler, R.M.; Massa,
G.D. Microbiological and nutritional analysis of lettuce crops grown on the International Space Station. Front. Plant Sci. 2020,
11, 199. [CrossRef]
55.
Link, B.M.; Busse, J.S.; Stankovic, B. Seed-to-Seed-to-Seed growth and development of Arabidopsis in microgravity. Astrobiology
2014, 14, 866–875. [CrossRef]
56.
Vandenbrink, J.P.; Kiss, J.Z.; Herranz, R.; Medina, F.J. Light and gravity signals synergize in modulating plant development. Front.
Plant Sci. 2014, 5, 563. [CrossRef]
57.
Reichler, S.A.; Balk, J.; Brown, M.E.; Woodruff, K.; Clark, G.B.; Roux, S.J. Light differentially regulates cell division and the mRNA
abundance of pea nucleolin during de-etiolation. Plant Physiol. 2001, 125, 339–350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Bourbousse, C.; Barneche, F.; Laloi, C. Plant chromatin catches the Sun. Front. Plant Sci. 2020, 10, 1728. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Manzano, A.; Pereda-Loth, V.; de Bures, A.; Sáez-Vásquez, J.; Herranz, R.; Medina, F.J. Light signals counteract alterations caused
by simulated microgravity in proliferating plant cells. Am. J. Bot. 2021, 108, 1775–1792. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Villacampa, A.; Fañanás-Pueyo, I.; Medina, F.J.; Ciska, M. Root growth direction in simulated microgravity is modulated by a
light avoidance mechanism mediated by ﬂavonols. Physiol. Plant. 2022, 174, e13722. [CrossRef]
61.
Manzano, A.; Creus, E.; Tomás, A.; Valbuena, M.A.; Villacampa, A.; Ciska, M.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z.; Medina, F.J.; Herranz,
R. The FixBox: Hardware to provide on-orbit ﬁxation capabilities to the EMCS on the ISS. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 2020, 32,
1105–1120. [CrossRef]
62.
Brunoud, G.; Wells, D.M.; Oliva, M.; Larrieu, A.; Mirabet, V.; Burrow, A.H.; Beeckman, T.; Kepinski, S.; Traas, J.; Bennett, M.J.; et al.
A novel sensor to map auxin response and distribution at high spatio-temporal resolution. Nature 2012, 482, 103–106. [CrossRef]
63.
Vandenbrink, J.P.; Herranz, R.; Medina, F.J.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z. A novel blue-light phototropic response is revealed in roots
of Arabidopsis thaliana in microgravity. Planta 2016, 244, 1201–1215. [CrossRef]
64.
Briggs, W.R. Phototropism: Some history, some puzzles, and a look ahead. Plant Physiol. 2014, 164, 13–23. [CrossRef]
65.
Vandenbrink, J.P.; Herranz, R.; Poehlman, W.L.; Alex Feltus, F.; Villacampa, A.; Ciska, M.; Medina, F.J.; Kiss, J.Z. RNA-seq
analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after exposure to blue-light phototropic stimuli in microgravity. Am. J. Bot. 2019, 106,
1466–1476. [CrossRef]
66.
Herranz, R.; Vandenbrink, J.P.; Villacampa, A.; Manzano, A.; Poehlman, W.L.; Feltus, F.A.; Kiss, J.Z.; Medina, F.J. RNAseq analysis
of the response of Arabidopsis thaliana to fractional gravity under blue-light stimulation during spaceﬂight. Front. Plant Sci. 2019,
10, 1529. [CrossRef]
67.
Valbuena, M.A.; Manzano, A.; Vandenbrink, J.P.; Pereda-Loth, V.; Carnero-Diaz, E.; Edelmann, R.E.; Kiss, J.Z.; Herranz, R.;
Medina, F.J. The combined effects of real or simulated microgravity and red-light photoactivation on plant root meristematic cells.
Planta 2018, 248, 691–704. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Life 2022, 12, 1484
17 of 17
68.
Eichler, G.S.; Huang, S.; Ingber, D.E. Gene Expression Dynamics Inspector (GEDI): For integrative analysis of expression proﬁles.
Bioinformatics 2003, 19, 2321–2322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Pontvianne, F.; Matia, I.; Douet, J.; Tourmente, S.; Medina, F.J.; Echeverria, M.; Saez-Vasquez, J. Characterization of AtNUC-L1
reveals a central role of nucleolin in plant development and nucleolus organization. Proc. FEBS J. 2007, 2007, 74.
70.
Durut, N.; Abou-Ellail, M.; Comella, P.; Jobet, E.; de Bures, A.; Sáez-Vásquez, J. NUCLEOLIN: Similar and antagonistic roles in
Arabidopsis thaliana. In Proceedings of the 26th European Low Gravity Research Association Biennial Symposium and General
Assembly, Granada, Spain, 24–27 September 2019; p. 150. Available online: https://www.elgra.org/wp-content/uploads/2020
/06/ELGRA2019-Book-of-abstracts.pdf (accessed on 1 July 2022).
71.
Manzano, A.; Villacampa, A.; Sáez-Vásquez, J.; Kiss, J.Z.; Medina, F.J.; Herranz, R. The importance of Earth reference controls
in spaceﬂight -omics research: Characterization of nucleolin mutants from the Seedling Growth experiments. iScience 2020, 23,
101686. [CrossRef]
72.
Herranz, R.; Valbuena, M.A.; Youssef, K.; Medina, F.J. Mechanisms of disruption of meristematic competence by microgravity in
Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant Signal. Behav. 2014, 9, e28289. [CrossRef]
73.
Medina, F.J.; Manzano, A.; Villacampa, A.; Ciska, M.; Herranz, R. Understanding reduced gravity effects on early plant
development before attempting life-support farming in the Moon and Mars. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 2021, 8, 729154. [CrossRef]
74.
Villacampa, A.; Ciska, M.; Manzano, A.; Vandenbrink, J.P.; Kiss, J.Z.; Herranz, R.; Medina, F.J. From spaceﬂight to Mars g-levels:
Adaptive response of A. thaliana seedlings in a reduced gravity environment is enhanced by red-light photostimulation. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 899. [CrossRef]
75.
Medina, F.J.; Manzano, A.; Kamal, K.Y.; Ciska, M.; Herranz, R. Plants in space: Novel physiological challenges and adaptation
mechanisms. In Progress in Botany; Lüttge, U., Cánovas, F.M., Pretzsch, H., Risueño, M.C., Eds.; Springer Nature: Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2021; Volume 83, pp. 1–36.
76.
Manzano, A.I.; Herranz, R.; Manzano, A.; Van Loon, J.J.W.A.; Medina, F.J. Early effects of altered gravity environments on plant
cell growth and cell proliferation: Characterization of morphofunctional nucleolar types in an Arabidopsis cell culture system.
Front. Astron. Space Sci. 2016, 3, 2. [CrossRef]
77.
Ferl, R.J.; Paul, A.-L. The effect of spaceﬂight on the gravity-sensing auxin gradient of roots: GFP reporter gene microscopy on
orbit. NPJ Microgravity 2016, 2, 15023. [CrossRef]
78.
Bräutigam, K.; Dietzel, L.; Pfannschmidt, T. Plastid-nucleus communication: Anterograde and retrograde signalling inthe
development and function of plastids. In Cell and Molecular Biology of Plastids; Bock, R., Ed.; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007;
pp. 409–455.
79.
Phukan, U.J.; Jeena, G.S.; Shukla, R.K. WRKY transcription factors: Molecular regulation and stress responses in plants. Front.
Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 760. [CrossRef]
80.
Van Aken, O.; Zhang, B.; Law, S.; Narsai, R.; Whelan, J. AtWRKY40 and AtWRKY63 modulate the expression of stress-responsive
nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial and chloroplast proteins. Plant Physiol. 2013, 162, 254–271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
