Roll maneuvers are essential for active reorientation
of Caenorhabditis elegans in 3D media
Alejandro Bilbaoa,1, Amar K. Patela, Mizanur Rahmanb, Siva A. Vanapallib, and Jerzy Blawzdziewicza,c,2
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409; bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock,
TX 79409; and cDepartment of Physics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409
Edited by David A. Weitz, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved March 5, 2018 (received for review April 25, 2017)
Locomotion of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is a key
observable used in investigations ranging from behavior to neuro-
science to aging. However, while the natural environment of this
model organism is 3D, quantitative investigations of its locomo-
tion have been mostly limited to 2D motion. Here, we present a
quantitative analysis of how the nematode reorients itself in 3D
media. We identify a unique behavioral state of C. elegans—a
roll maneuver—which is an essential component of 3D locomotion
in burrowing and swimming. The rolls, associated with nonzero
torsion of the nematode body, result in rotation of the plane of
dorsoventral body undulations about the symmetry axis of the tra-
jectory. When combined with planar turns in a new undulation
plane, the rolls allow the nematode to reorient its body in any
direction, thus enabling complete exploration of 3D space. The rolls
observed in swimming are much faster than the ones in burrowing;
we show that this difference stems from a purely hydrodynamic
enhancement mechanism and not from a gait change or an increase
in the body torsion. This result demonstrates that hydrodynamic
viscous forces can enhance 3D reorientation in undulatory loco-
motion, in contrast to known hydrodynamic hindrance of both
forward motion and planar turns.
Caenorhabdtis elegans | undulatory locomotion | 3D gait |
maneuverability | behavior
I
nvestigations of locomotion of the nematode Caenorhabdi-
tis elegans can provide a wealth of knowledge on physiology,
muscle biology, and neural control of movement and behavior.
Locomotion depends on muscular strength (1–3), neuromus-
cular coordination (4, 5), and processing of information from
sensory inputs (6, 7). Locomotory readouts are thus extensively
used to quantify effects of genetic mutations (8–10), exercise,
nutrition, and environmental factors (11–17) and to evaluate
pharmacological impacts (18, 19).
In its natural environment (soil rich in decaying organic mat-
ter), C. elegans interacts with a complex 3D surrounding medium
that includes soft organic materials and rainwater (20, 21). Most
studies of nematode locomotion, however, have focused on 2D
motion (22–32), and little effort has been made to characterize
worm motility in 3D environments.
Only recently was 3D burrowing motion of C. elegans in soft
substrates stereoscopically imaged (33) and a statistical analy-
sis of basic locomotory parameters reported (34); it was also
shown that a burrowing nematode can reorient itself in response
to external stimuli (34, 35). Furthermore, feasibility of using 3D
motion to assess genetic mutations (36) and to identify muscular
dystrophy (34) was experimentally demonstrated.
Such 3D methods of scoring C. elegans locomotory behavior
can achieve better sensitivity than screens based on 2D obser-
vations alone. However, unleashing the full potential of these
promising techniques requires complementary efforts to iden-
tify speciﬁc behavioral patterns associated with 3D reorientation
maneuvers. A thorough quantitative understanding of 3D gait
geometry and mechanics is also important for gaining insights
into mechanisms of neuromuscular actuation of body movements
and for development of next-generation software packages for
automated tracking and analysis of nematode behavior.
Active Spatial Reorientation Maneuvers of C. elegans: Planar
Turns and 3D Rolls
In our investigation of 3D locomotion of C. elegans in bulk media
we focus on active body reorientation, in contrast to recently
studied passive changes of locomotion direction produced by
interactions of the nematode body with obstacles (37), bound-
aries (30), and/or external ﬂow (31). Active reorientation maneu-
vers (29) have received, so far, much less attention, despite their
importance for search behavior, chemotaxis, thermotaxis, and
escape response.
As illustrated in Fig. 1 for a swimming nematode (also corre-
sponding Movies S1 and S2), C. elegans can reorient its body by
combining 2D turns in the plane of dorsoventral undulations with
3D roll maneuvers that result in axial rotation of the undulation
plane. Turns in 2D are executed by asymmetrically altering the
amplitude of planar body undulations (28, 29, 34, 38), whereas
rolls require nonplanar body postures. Our geometrical analysis
(presented in Torsional Roll Is a Unique 3D Behavioral State) of
available stereoscopic nematode images (33) demonstrates that
turns and rolls can also be observed for nematodes burrowing in
soft gel-like media.
A combination of planar turns and 3D rolls allows C. elegans
to reorient itself in any direction (schematically depicted in Fig.
2), whereas 2D turning maneuvers alone [e.g., Ωturns (6), loop/δ
turns (28, 33, 39), and pirouettes (40)] restrict nematode move-
ments to one plane. Thus, the roll maneuvers identiﬁed in this
Signiﬁcance
Investigations of the free-living nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans give powerful insights into fundamental biological
processes that are conserved across species. Locomotion of
this model organism is used to assess muscular and neural
defects and score impacts of genetic mutations and pharmaco-
logical interventions. Existing analyses of the nematode gait
have been focused on 2D locomotion, and 3D motion remains
largely unexplored. We identify and mathematically describe
a unique 3D behavioral pattern in burrowing and swimming—
a roll maneuver—which, in combination with 2D turns, allows
the nematode to explore bulk media. Our results provide
important insights into 3D neuromuscular actuation and may
be used to develop better assays for locomotion phenotype
analysis.
Author contributions: S.A.V. and J.B. designed research; A.B., A.K.P., M.R., S.A.V., and J.B.
performed research; A.B., A.K.P., and J.B. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; A.B.,
A.K.P., M.R., and J.B. analyzed data; and A.B., A.K.P., and J.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Published under the PNAS license.
1Present address: Department of Engineering Science, Jamestown Community College,
Jamestown, NY 14702.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: jerzy.blawzdziewicz@ttu.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1706754115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online April 4, 2018.
E3616–E3625
|
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 16
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706754115

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
A
B
Fig. 1.
Typical reorientation maneuvers of swimming C. elegans. Shown are time-lapse images of a swimming C. elegans (A) performing a 2D turn and (B)
rapidly switching the plane of undulations in a 3D roll maneuver. The nematode moves from right to left in both A and B. The arrows in B indicate the
location of the ovary, helping to identify the nematode body orientation. (Magniﬁcation: 1.6×.)
work constitute an important behavioral state; this crucial loco-
motion component enables C. elegans to explore 3D media in
search for optimal environmental conditions.
Movie S1 and video images shown in Fig. 1A [and our prior
study (29)] reveal that planar turns in swimming are shallower
than no-slip turns in crawling or burrowing (analogous to the
reduced forward progression in swimming). In contrast, swim-
ming rolls (Movie S2 and Fig. 1B) can be signiﬁcantly more rapid
than those found for burrowing. The effectiveness of turn and
roll maneuvers in burrowing and swimming is assessed by solv-
ing equations of motion for the nematode body moving in gels
and ﬂuids. Our calculations show that the same hydrodynamic
resistance forces that reduce the swimming velocity (29, 41, 42)
and planar turn angles (29) signiﬁcantly enhance the roll rota-
tion rate. This counterintuitive result of our theoretical analysis
agrees well with experimental observations.
The geometry of 3D nematode motion is signiﬁcantly more
involved than planar geometry. Therefore, to faithfully identify
and interpret speciﬁc locomotory behavioral patterns of C. ele-
gans and understand hydrodynamic mechanisms of enhancement
of the roll maneuvers, we need adequate tools for describing
body postures. To explain the geometry of nematode movements
in 3D, we thus generalize the recently proposed piecewise har-
monic curvature (PHC) model of planar nematode gait (28, 29)
by introducing the curve torsion to the gait description.
Geometrical Description of 3D Nematode Gait
Three-Dimensional Nematode Gait Can Be Described Using Curvature
and Torsion of the Nematode Body. Since the body of C. elegans is
highly elongated, its postures can be faithfully represented by the
body centerline (22, 28, 38, 42–44). In 3D the centerline conﬁgu-
ration at time t is described by the local worm curvature κw(s′, t)
and torsion τw(s′, t), where s′ is the arc-length coordinate along
the body (Fig. 3A).
The body conﬁguration can be reconstructed from the cur-
vature and torsion functions, κw
and τw, by solving the
Serret–Frenet equations (45)
dˆt
ds′ = κwˆn,
[1a]
dˆn
ds′ = −κwˆt + τwˆb,
[1b]
dˆb
ds′ = −τwˆn
[1c]
with the boundary condition corresponding to a given position
and orientation of the nematode tail or head. Here ˆn, ˆt, and
ˆb =ˆt × ˆn are the normal, tangent, and binormal unit vectors at
a local position s′ along the nematode body. The curvature
and torsion correspond to rotation of the Serret–Frenet basis
(ˆt, ˆn, ˆb) about the binormal and tangent directions; the geometri-
cal interpretation of these parameters is illustrated in Fig. 3B. In
what follows we analyze the curvature and torsion of the nema-
tode body to identify behavioral patterns of C. elegans moving
in 3D.
Curvature and Torsion Waveform Is Similar in Motion With and With-
out Transverse Slip. Due to large transverse mechanical resistance
provided by the environment, burrowing or crawling C. elegans
often move with no transverse slip of body segments. Therefore,
all segments follow a single curvilinear trail. The trail geometry
can be described using the trail curvature and torsion, κ(s) and
τ(s), where s is the arc-length coordinate measured from the
beginning of the trail. Since at any given time t the conﬁguration
A
B
C
Fig. 2.
Schematic illustrating nematode reorientation in 3D. The worm (A)
undulates in the initial plane of motion, (B) executes a roll maneuver, and
(C) performs a planar turn in the new plane of motion.
Bilbao et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 16
|
E3617

A
B
Fig. 3.
Description of body postures and trails of C. elegans in 3D. (A) Deﬁ-
nition of the trail coordinate s and the worm coordinate s′. (B) Rotation of
the Serret–Frenet basis (ˆt, ˆn, ˆb) as it moves along the curve. The curvature κ
is associated with rotation around the binormal unit vector ˆb; deformations
resulting from nonzero curvature thus occur in the ˆt–ˆn plane. Torsion τ is
associated with rotation around the tangent unit vectorˆt; a nonzero torsion
results in out-of-plane curve deformation, because the local deformation
plane (ˆt, ˆn) changes its orientation.
of the nematode body coincides with a trail segment (Fig. 3A),
the worm curvature and torsion and trail curvature and torsion
are directly related,
κ(s) = κw(s′, t),
[2a]
τ(s) = τw(s′, t),
[2b]
where s = s′ + vst, and vs is the worm velocity along the trail.
Accordingly, the curvature and torsion waves propagate along
the nematode body without changing their waveform.
In ﬂuid media where transverse slip does occur, and the nema-
tode body segments do not follow the same path because of their
transverse displacements, the worm curvature and torsion func-
tions κw(s′, t) and τw(s′, t) are not geometrically constrained
to obey the propagating-wave relations, Eq. 2. Nonetheless, our
earlier analysis of the 2D gait of C. elegans swimming in water
indicates that even in a ﬂuid environment the curvature-wave
relation, Eq. 2a, is preserved with good accuracy (28), despite
a signiﬁcant transverse motion. Since this behavior is a signature
of the proprioceptive coupling (4) that allows the nematode to
maintain properly formed propulsive body undulations in media
with different mechanical properties, we assume that the curva-
ture and torsion propagating-wave relations, Eq. 2, are satisﬁed
both in no-slip burrowing and in 3D swimming. Moreover, as dis-
cussed below, the waveform κ(s) and τ(s) of body undulations is
essentially the same in different media (although the wavelength
of the undulations varies).
Key Elements of 2D Locomotion
Since identiﬁcation of 3D behavioral patterns of C. elegans relies
on prior understanding of planar locomotion, we summarize here
the relevant key results of our previous studies of the geometry
of 2D motion (28, 29, 46).
Harmonic Curvature Undulations Describe a Variety of Elementary
Body Postures. In 2D environments, C. elegans generally restrict
their locomotion patterns to dorsoventral planar undulations.
A quantitative analysis presented in our previous work (28)
shows that a variety of planar nematode body postures can be
accurately described by the harmonic curvature function
κ(s) = A cos (qs + φ),
[3]
where A is the wave amplitude, q = 2π/λ is the wavevector, and
φ is the phase angle.
Fig. 4 shows some typical crawling and swimming 2D pos-
tures that can be represented by the harmonic curvature. Typi-
cal crawling and swimming body conﬁgurations associated with
forward motion are characterized by moderate values of the
dimensionless amplitude A/q ≈1 (Fig. 4 A, i and iii and B, i
and iii); higher amplitudes correspond to commonly observed
Ωshapes (Fig. 4 A, ii and iv and B, ii and iv) and loops (Fig. 4
A, v and B, v). The distinction between swimming and crawling
postures stems primarily from a difference in normalized wave-
length λ/L; swimming C-shaped postures generally exhibit larger
λ/L compared with crawling (25) and burrowing (34) W-shaped
postures.
B
A
Fig. 4.
Elementary body shapes of C. elegans in crawling and swimming. (A)
Video images of crawling and swimming C. elegans. (Magniﬁcation: 1.6×.)
(B) Family of approximately matching curves reproduced from harmonic cur-
vature, Eq. 3, for normalized amplitude A/q as labeled. The green and blue
arrows are the unit tangent and normal vectors, respectively. The body of a
nematode moving along the curves is represented by thick line segments of
normalized length qL.
E3618
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706754115
Bilbao et al.

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
Two-Dimensional Turns Are Associated with Harmonic Mode Transi-
tions. A moving C. elegans does not maintain a single harmonic-
curvature mode; instead, it stochastically varies mode parameters,
which results in changes of the moving direction. A quantitative
analysis of crawling trajectories (28) indicates that entire trails of
crawling C. elegans can be accurately represented by the harmonic
function, Eq. 3, with discontinuously varying wave parameters
A, q, and φ between harmonic-curvature intervals. In this PHC
representation sharp turns associated with strongly curved Ωor
loop body postures correspond to harmonic-curvature intervals
characterized by a large normalized curvature amplitude A/q.
Three-Dimensional Torsional Roll Maneuvers in No-Slip
Burrowing
C. elegans burrowing through a soft gel-like substrate (such as
agar) often move without transverse slip of the body with respect
to the surrounding medium, because the ﬁnite yield stress of the
gel prevents transverse displacements. In this section we con-
sider no-slip 3D locomotion along a curvilinear path carved in
the gel.
Recently Beron et al. (34) and Vidal-Gadea et al. (35) inves-
tigated nonplanar motion of C. elegans in a gel showing that the
nematode can actively reorient itself in 3D in response to exter-
nal stimuli. While they measured the frequency of out-of-plane
changes of direction, their studies have not supplied sufﬁcient
data for unambiguous identiﬁcation of stereotyped behavioral
patterns associated with 3D reorientation maneuvers. Quan-
titative data on 3D nematode shapes and motion have been
provided by Kwon et al. (33), who presented stereoscopic images
of 3D burrowing C. elegans. Our thorough analysis of these
images allows us to identify a speciﬁc behavioral pattern—the
roll maneuver—that the nematode uses in 3D locomotion.
One-Mode Roll Maneuver: Nonzero Torsion Results in Rotation of
the Undulation Plane. Before we proceed to our analysis of the
observed 3D nematode gait, we ﬁrst examine the effect of
nonzero torsion on harmonic-curvature undulations. Fig. 5A
shows numerical solutions of Serret–Frenet equations for a curve
with harmonic curvature, Eq. 3, and constant torsion
τ(s) = τ0.
[4]
The results are shown for the default curvature-wave amplitude
A/q = 1 and several values of the torsion τ0.
The plots indicate that for moderate values of τ0, the undu-
latory character of nematode motion is preserved, and the
undulation plane rotates when the nematode moves forward.
Geometrically, this torsion-induced reorientation stems from the
rotation of the deformation plane ˆt–ˆn about the tangent vector
ˆt when the Serret–Frenet basis moves along the nematode trail
(schematically depicted in Fig. 3B). We call the gait deﬁned by
Eqs. 3 and 4 a (one-mode) torsional roll. The results of our cal-
culations for the roll-rotation rate per undulation period ωroll are
presented in Fig. 5B.
First, we point out that a calculated body conﬁguration
depicted by the thick line segment in Fig. 5A (for τ0/q = 0.075)
resembles the reported (47) nonplanar posture of a crawling
nematode that lifts a body segment from the underlying agar sur-
face; the reported image (47) is reproduced in Fig. 5C. Second,
our detailed analysis of stereoscopic images (33) of a burrowing
nematode, discussed next, demonstrates that C. elegans use the
torsional-roll maneuver for 3D reorientation.
The Three-Mode Torsional Roll Model Accurately Describes Observed
3D Motion of Burrowing C. elegans. The video images reproduced
from ref. 33 (Fig. 6A) show that during its forward motion the
depicted nematode is gradually changing the orientation of
the plane of undulations, consistent with the general shape of
the constant-torsion lines shown in Fig. 5A. In the initial frame
of Fig. 6A the entire nematode body undulates in the y–z plane,
which indicates that at time t = 0 s the roll maneuver has not yet
started. Subsequently, the nematode begins the roll maneuver,
and an increasing portion of the body-wave plane is reorienting.
At time t = 2 s, the anterior part is already signiﬁcantly reori-
ented (by ∼45◦), but the undulations in the posterior portion
still remain oriented in the y–z plane.
To describe the observed behavior, we introduce a three-mode
torsional-roll model,
τ(s) =



0,
s < sτ
1 ,
τ0,
sτ
1 < s < sτ
2 ,
0,
sτ
2 < s,
[5]
where for s < sτ
1 and s > sτ
2 the nematode undergoes planar
undulations, and it performs the roll only in the spatiotemporal
A
C
B
Fig. 5.
The effect of nonzero torsion on body postures and no-slip trails. (A)
Curves deﬁned by the harmonic curvature (normalized amplitude A/q = 1)
and constant torsion (normalized magnitude τ0/q as labeled). The green,
blue, and red arrows are the unit tangent, normal, and binormal vectors,
respectively. A, Left shows projection of nematode trajectories on the z–y
plane, where the direction of travel is along the z axis. A, Right shows x–y
projections of the respective trajectories. The green and red circles represent
the initial and ﬁnal points of the trajectories. (B) The torsional roll-rotation
rate per undulation period ωroll (in degrees) vs. normalized body torsion
τ0/q for one-mode torsional roll with harmonic-curvature amplitude A/q
as labeled. (C) A crawling nematode undergoing a nonplanar body defor-
mation. The lifted body segment is indicated by the arrow. Reprinted with
permission from ref. 47; www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09252312.
The thick line segment shown for τ0/q = 0.075 in A represents a nematode
shape approximately matching the image depicted in C.
Bilbao et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 16
|
E3619

A
B
x-z image
y-z image
x-z view
y-z view
Fig. 6.
Torsional roll of a burrowing C. elegans. (A) Stereoscopic images
of a wild-type C. elegans burrowing in gelatin (image reprinted from ref.
33). (B) A matching time-lapse set of simulated postures of a nematode per-
forming a three-mode torsional roll, Eq. 5. The simulation parameters are
curvature amplitude A/q = 1, worm length qL = 10.2, torsion τ0/q = 0.15,
and torsional-mode length q∆sτ = 6. Similar to the experimental images,
the calculated postures are equally spaced in time. The region of nonzero
torsion is shaded in blue.
interval sτ
1 < s < sτ
2 of ﬁnite length ∆sτ = sτ
2 −sτ
1 . During the
entire three-mode roll maneuver, the body undulations are
described by a single harmonic-curvature mode, Eq. 3, and the
propagating body curvature and torsion waves are given by Eq. 2.
Torsional Roll Is a Unique 3D Behavioral State. As shown in Fig.
6, our three-mode roll model, Eq. 5, is in excellent agreement
with the stereoscopic nematode-tracking images by Kwon et al.
(33). All key features of the nematode gait are correctly repro-
duced for the entire 2-s time interval, including the fact that
an increasing part of the body undergoes the roll, but the rest
remains planar. The calculated body postures shown in Fig. 6B
were obtained from a single continuous simulation; these are not
separate ﬁts to individual body postures. Our model faithfully
describes the entire behavioral pattern (a 3D roll). We conclude
that we have identiﬁed and mathematically described a unique
behavioral state of C. elegans.
Maneuverability of Swimming C. elegans in Bulk Fluids
In environments with different mechanical properties typical
body postures of C. elegans are distinct because the undulation
wavelength λ differs relative to the body length L (Fig. 4); how-
ever, the harmonic-curvature undulation waveform described by
Eqs. 1–3 is preserved (28). In particular, the geometrical simi-
larity between the swimming and crawling gaits is corroborated
by the important observation by Fang-Yen et al. (25) that the
wavelength of undulations in swimming continuously decreases
with increasing ﬂuid viscosity, and in highly viscous ﬂuids the
swimming gait is very similar to the crawling gait. Thus, ﬂuid
viscosity affects the undulation wavelength, but the waveform is
unaffected.
Swimming Trajectories Depend on the Gait Geometry and Hydrody-
namic Force and Torque Balance. Based on the above observations,
we conclude that the gait description developed in the previous
sections to elucidate no-slip locomotion yields a suitable frame-
work for inquiry into the mechanics of reorientation maneuvers
of swimming C. elegans. Accordingly, we assume that the wave-
form Eq. 2 of the propagating curvature and torsion is main-
tained in ﬂuids, and we decompose the motion of a swimming
nematode into the geometrical component i and dynamical com-
ponent ii, where i is the progression along the curvilinear path
determined by the curvature and torsion functions κ(s) and τ(s),
and ii is the rigid-body translation and rotation resulting from the
hydrodynamic force and torque balance on the entire nematode
body.
Due to the presence of the translational and rotational motion
ii, the trajectories of swimming nematodes differ from those
of crawling/burrowing nematodes using the same sequence of
body postures and moving along a no-slip path. Moreover, in
swimming the trajectories depend not only on the form of the
curvature and torsion waves, but also on the normalized undula-
tion wavelength λ/L, whereas the no-slip path i is independent
of this parameter.
The above decomposition into i and ii is particularly useful
in the linear creeping-ﬂow regime (considered here), because in
this case there are no inertial effects, and the total hydrodynamic
force and torque can be evaluated by superposing the forces and
torques associated with the component velocities i and ii. Our
bead-based technique for calculating hydrodynamic forces act-
ing on a nematode is described in Materials and Methods and in
our previous study of 2D undulatory locomotion (29).
Planar Turn Angles in Swimming Are Reduced Compared with No-
Slip Motion. As shown in Fig. 1A and the corresponding Movie
S1, crawling and swimming nematodes perform planar turns
by asymmetrically increasing their undulation amplitude for
short time intervals. To assess the effectiveness of such turning
maneuvers, we consider three-mode PHC turns,
κ(s) =



A1 cos (qs),
s < sc
1,
A2 cos (qs),
sc
1 < s < sc
2,
A1 cos (qs),
sc
2 < s,
[6]
in which the nematode initially moves using the default locomo-
tion mode with the amplitude A1/q ≈1, then at a position sc
1
switches to the turning mode with a higher amplitude A2 > A1,
and ﬁnally at a position sc
2 returns to the default locomotion
mode (Fig. 7A). For simplicity, we focus on maneuvers in which
only the amplitude of the harmonic curvature varies.
Fig. 7 presents a comparison between calculated trajectories
for nematodes executing a three-mode planar turn in crawl-
ing/burrowing without transverse slip (Fig. 7B) and swimming
(Fig. 7C). The swimming nematodes undergo the same sequence
of body postures as the crawling/burrowing ones, but their corre-
sponding trajectories differ because of the translational and rota-
tional velocity component ii that is present only in swimming. Fig.
7D shows the dependence of the turn angle on the turning-mode
amplitude A2/q for both cases. Consistent with the experimental
results (Fig. 1A and Movie S1), the turn angles in swimming are
relatively shallow, as a result of the hydrodynamically induced
rotation.
The swimming angles are always signiﬁcantly smaller than the
corresponding angles for crawling (or burrowing); this hydrody-
namic hindrance is especially pronounced for small turning-mode
E3620
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706754115
Bilbao et al.

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
A
D
C
B
Fig. 7.
Effectiveness of three-mode planar turns in crawling/burrowing and
swimming. (A) Deﬁnition of the turn angle θturn and positions of the turn
mode-switching points sc
1 and sc
2 = sc
1 + ∆sc for the PHC maneuvers shown.
We use qsc
1 = 3π/2, q∆sc = 0.6, and default mode amplitude A1/q = 1 for
all calculations shown. (B) Three-mode planar turn trajectories and snap-
shots of body postures (thick trail segments, qL = 5.5) for a nematode
crawling/burrowing without transverse slip and with turning-mode ampli-
tude A2/q as labeled. (C) A sequence of simulation snapshots of a swimming
C-shaped nematode (qL = 5.5) performing a three-mode PHC turn, with the
turning mode amplitude as labeled. (D) Comparison of the dependence
of the turn angle θturn (in degrees) on the turning-mode amplitude A2/q
for motion without transverse slip (dashed line) and swimming (solid line).
The three circles for each case correspond to the shown trajectories and
snapshots.
amplitudes. A swimming nematode usually needs to perform sev-
eral turns to signiﬁcantly change its locomotion direction. A typi-
cal case of such a combined multimode turning maneuver is pre-
sented in Movie S1, which shows a turn of a swimming wild-type
C. elegans along with a matching hydrodynamic simulation.
Roll Rotation Rate in Swimming Is Increased Compared with No-Slip
Motion. As shown in Fig. 1B and the corresponding Movie S2, a
swimming nematode can quickly change the plane of undulations
by performing a roll maneuver. Our experimental observations
indicate that a roll by 90◦often occurs in one undulation period,
and faster rolls are not unusual. This rotation is much more rapid
than the rotation observed in burrowing (Fig. 6).
Our images of swimming C. elegans undergoing undulation-
plane reorientation indicate that the nematode body postures are
nonplanar, similar to the corresponding behavior in burrowing.
These 3D swimming postures closely resemble the torsional-roll
conﬁgurations deﬁned by Eqs. 3 and 4, as depicted in Fig. 8
A and B. While the out-of-plane deformation of the nematode
body shown in Fig. 8A seems quite small, our hydrodynamic sim-
ulations indicate that even such a relatively minor out-of-plane
torsional distortion can result in a rapid reorientation of the
undulation plane.
Such rapid axial reorientation is illustrated by the hydrody-
namic simulations of three-mode roll maneuvers presented in
Fig. 8C and in Movie S3. In both cases the nematode undergoes
a roll rotation of ∼90◦in less than one period of undulations, in
agreement with our experimental observations.
The effectiveness of roll reorientation in ﬂuids is quantitatively
assessed in Fig. 9A for C-shaped gait and in Fig. 9B for W-shaped
gait in terms of the roll rotation rate ωroll per undulation period.
Since the hydrodynamic component of the rolling rate is affected
by the nematode length L, the results are shown versus τ0L,
that is, the torsion normalized by L. Similar to the correspond-
ing result for the no-slip roll of a burrowing nematode (Fig. 5B),
the roll rotation rate in swimming decreases with the normalized
curvature-wave amplitude A/q. However, the relation between
ωroll and the torsion is nonlinear, and the dependence on the nor-
malized undulation amplitude A/q is signiﬁcantly weaker, due
to hydrodynamic effects. The roll rotation for C-shaped and W-
shaped gaits has a similar magnitude for given values of A/q
and τ0L.
A Comparison of Roll Rotation Rate in Burrowing and Swimming
Provides Evidence for a Signiﬁcant Hydrodynamic Enhancement. To
directly compare the swimming roll rotation rate ωroll shown in
Fig. 9 A and B with the corresponding purely geometrical no-
slip result (Fig. 5B), the swimming and no-slip simulation data
are replotted in Fig. 9C using the same scaling of the torsion
τ0/q for both datasets. The results indicate that hydrodynamic
forces in swimming can enhance the rotation rate in a very sig-
niﬁcant way. Compared with the values in the no-slip burrowing
case (for the same sequence of nematode body motions), the
roll rotation rate ωroll in swimming increases by a factor rang-
ing from approximately 2 (for C-shaped gait) to even 3 (for
W-shaped gait). For example, a swimming nematode using a W-
shaped gait [e.g., C. elegans swimming in a highly viscous dextran
solution (25)] would rotate at a rate ωroll ≈120◦per undulation
period for body torsion τ0/q = 0.15. A burrowing nematode with
a similar gait (e.g., Fig. 6) would have a rotation rate of only
ωroll ≈40◦.
The Mechanisms of Hydrodynamic Hindrance and
Enhancement
As illustrated in Figs. 10 and 11, both the hindrance of planar
locomotion and the 3D roll enhancement result from the longi-
tudinal resistance forces (acting parallel to local body segments).
These longitudinal resistance forces counteract the propulsive
transverse forces that drive the nematode forward when the
undulatory wave propagates backward along the body. In bur-
rowing, the longitudinal resistance is too weak (compared with
the transverse resistance) to produce any signiﬁcant body dis-
placements; thus the nematode moves along the purely geomet-
rical no-slip path i, deﬁned by the curvature and torsion wave.
In swimming, the force and torque associated with the longitudi-
nal resistance produce additional translation and rotation of the
nematode body ii (indicated by blue arrows in Figs. 10 and 11).
Force and Torque Associated with Longitudinal Hydrodynamic Resis-
tance Hinder Forward Motion and 2D Turns. In forward locomotion,
the longitudinal resistance force always acts in the direction
opposite to the direction of nematode motion (Fig. 10A). In
swimming this force thus results in reduction of locomotion
velocity (29, 41). Similarly, the torque acting on the nematode
body undergoing a deep asymmetric undulation during a planar
turn is oriented opposite to the turn direction, thus hindering the
turn (Fig. 10B).
Axial Torque Produced by the Longitudinal Hydrodynamic Resistance
Enhances Roll Rotation. The analysis of the effect of hydrody-
namic interactions in torsional roll is more subtle. To eluci-
date the interplay of the gait geometry and the longitudinal
Bilbao et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 16
|
E3621

A
B
C
z-y
z-x
x-y
Fig. 8.
Three-mode torsional roll of a swimming C. elegans. (A and B) A recorded nonplanar body posture (A) and a matching calculated body shape (B)
with harmonic curvature and constant torsion. Normalized curvature amplitude A/q = 1, wavevector qL = 5.5, and torsion τ0/q = 0.16 (which is equivalent
to τ0L = 0.9). (Magniﬁcation: 1.6×.) (C) Stereoscopic views of a simulated nematode performing a three-mode swimming roll maneuver (projection planes
as labeled). At times t1 and t4 the nematode performs planar undulations; at t2 and t3 it performs a roll with gait parameters corresponding to the posture
shown in B; the total length of the torsional roll mode is q∆sτ = 2π. The roll results in a change of the undulation plane by ∼90◦.
hydrodynamic friction, we show two views of the nematode tra-
jectory: the side view (Fig. 11A) and the front view (Fig. 11 B
and C). Fig. 11 indicates that, as a result of torsional distortion
of the nematode body, the undulation plane in no-slip motion
[i.e., along the path i before the hydrodynamic displacement ii is
included] gradually changes its orientation. Therefore, it can be
observed that the trajectory spirals around its axis (Fig. 11B).
In the projections of the no-slip path shown in Fig. 11 B and
C, the nematode moves in the clockwise direction around the
trajectory axis (which points toward the viewer). In contrast,
the undulation plane geometrically rotates anticlockwise (deter-
mined from the orientation of this plane in subsequent periods).
This anticlockwise rotation of the undulation plane arises from
the star-like topology of the calculated path projection.
The clockwise nematode motion produces the oppositely ori-
ented hydrodynamically induced resistance FH (Fig. 11C), which
in our example results in an anticlockwise axial torque TH and
the corresponding hydrodynamic rotation of the nematode in the
anticlockwise direction about the trajectory axis. Since the geo-
metrical and hydrodynamic contributions to ωroll have the same
orientation (anticlockwise in the particular case analyzed), they
add up, which leads to a signiﬁcant enhancement of the roll rota-
tion in swimming, consistent with our experimental observations
and the numerical results shown in Fig. 9C.
Discussion
Torsional Roll Is a Unique Behavioral State That Is Essential for 3D
Locomotion. Based on our investigation of available stereoscopic
images and other experimental evidence, we have shown that
C. elegans explore their 3D environment by combining planar
turns with roll reorientation maneuvers. The rolls, during which
the undulation plane of the worm rotates about the trajectory
axis, constitute an important previously unrecognized behavioral
pattern that is an essential component of 3D locomotion.
To identify the roll maneuvers and describe their geome-
try, we have developed a mathematical representation of the
3D nematode gait. According to our analysis, the roll maneu-
vers combine harmonic curvature with a piecewise constant
torsion that causes the undulation-plane reorientation. Our 3D
model of roll maneuvers faithfully reproduces all key geo-
metrical features of the observed roll behavior of a burrow-
ing nematode and, when integrated with appropriate hydro-
dynamic calculations, replicates a rapid roll rotation observed
in swimming. We have provided a physical explanation of this
unexpected hydrodynamic enhancement effect in the 3D roll
maneuver.
Our modeling approach provides a powerful tool for inves-
tigating 3D locomotion of C. elegans, including initiation and
execution of behavioral patterns associated with 3D reorienta-
tion. For example, our techniques can be applied to analyze
chemotaxis strategies and escape responses, as well as to evaluate
the effect of nematode health and age on locomotory abilities. In
Application to Chemotaxis we describe a proof-of-concept calcu-
lation showing that the nematode can use a combination of turn
and roll reorientation maneuvers to efﬁciently chemotax in 3D
environments. To illustrate typical maneuvers in 3D space, we
present two examples of numerical simulations of a nematode
performing multiple turns and rolls (Movie S4 for burrowing and
Movie S5 for swimming).
Our analysis reveals that both the burrowing and swim-
ming rolls involve a similar pattern of nematode movements
deﬁned by a curvature wave with nonzero torsion. Several recent
A
B
C
Fig. 9.
Hydrodynamic enhancement of roll rotation rate. (A and B) The
roll rotation rate per undulation ωroll (in degrees) in swimming is shown
vs. normalized body torsion τ0L, for normalized curvature-wave amplitude
A/q = 0.8, 1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8 (from above) for (A) C-shaped (qL = 5.5) and
(B) W-shaped (qL = 9) swimming nematodes. Examples of nematode shapes
are shown in respective Insets. (C) Comparison of roll rotation rate per
undulation period, ωroll (in degrees), between nematodes performing one-
mode roll in swimming (solid lines) and burrowing (dashed lines), shown
vs. normalized magnitude of body torsion τ0/q. Results are presented for C-
shaped and W-shaped gaits (as labeled) and normalized harmonic-curvature
amplitude A/q = 1.
E3622
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706754115
Bilbao et al.

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
A
B
Fig. 10.
Mechanism of hydrodynamic hindrance of planar motion. A and
B show no-slip paths (thin dashed line) and nematode positions (thick
lines) in no-slip crawling/burrowing and swimming. The initial body con-
ﬁgurations (0) are marked by the thick gray line. The body conﬁgurations
after two undulation periods, marked with 2, are shown in no-slip crawl-
ing/burrowing by the gray line with black border and the corresponding
body conﬁgurations in swimming (2H) by a thick black line. In forward
locomotion (A), the longitudinal hydrodynamic resistance (indicated for the
initial conﬁguration by red arrows) produces a net hydrodynamic force caus-
ing backward nematode displacement (indicated by the blue arrow); it slows
the nematode down. Similarly, during a planar turn (B) the net hydrody-
namic torque produces rotation that reduces the overall turn angle of the
nematode.
experimental studies showed that the nematode gait is not sig-
niﬁcantly affected by the rheological properties of the suspend-
ing medium (48–51), for the system parameters investigated.
Such results were documented for viscoelastic ﬂuids (48), shear-
thinning ﬂuids (50), and entangled polymeric solutions (49).
For nematodes swimming in a shear-thinning suspension (51),
a moderate increase in the head-bending angle was observed,
but even in this case, the overall form of undulations remained
similar to the waveform observed in Newtonian ﬂuids. Based on
the above wide spectrum of systems in which rheological prop-
erties of the suspending medium do not affect the locomotory
undulation pattern, we conclude that the same simple undula-
tion waveform likely occurs for C. elegans moving in a variety
of complex media present in its natural environment. Moreover,
since roll maneuvers provide effective 3D reorientation and do
not require complicated patterns of body actuation, we anticipate
that similar rolls are performed by other undulatory burrowers
and swimmers.
Torsional Roll Maneuvers Help Sedimented Adult Nematodes Main-
tain Swimming Capabilities. Trajectories of swimming C. elegans
are affected not only by active actuation but also by buoyancy
forces. During the larval stages of development and for nema-
todes swimming in highly viscous aqueous solutions of organic
matter (common in C. elegans habitat) the effect of buoyancy is
negligible. Adult nematodes swimming in water, however, tend
to settle down toward the bottom of the pool and reside close
to the bottom surface, following its topology (52). As shown by
Yuan et al. (52), the worms remain suspended due to the upward
force that results from continuous head collisions with the bot-
tom wall when the nematode body undulates in an approximately
vertical plane.
In our experiments, we ﬁnd that during this near-the-bottom
locomotion, nematodes perform frequent rolls (one roll of about
90◦per several undulation periods), with the frequency similar
to the roll frequency in a bulk ﬂuid. The rolls allow the worms to
repeatedly attain approximately vertical orientation of the undu-
lation plane (Movie S6). Such a vertical orientation is necessary
for the sedimenting worms to be able to generate the upward
resuspending force through collisions with the bottom. We thus
conclude that the roll maneuvers are used by C. elegans not only
to change the direction of motion in 3D, but also to remain
suspended near the bottom surface and, therefore, to maintain
the swimming behavior in the presence of signiﬁcant buoyancy
forces.
Muscular System of C. elegans Is Compatible with 3D Body Actuation,
but Neural Control Mechanism Is Unknown. As an important appli-
cation of this study, our results may shed light on subtle aspects
of neuromuscular control of 3D locomotion of C. elegans. Body
movements of C. elegans are actuated by a coordinated action
of four quadrants of body muscles, which are arranged into dou-
ble rows that span the entire nematode length (53). While this
muscle anatomy is compatible with 3D body actuation, it is less
clear how the neural system can activate differential muscle con-
tractions needed to generate 3D body deformations out of the
dorsoventral undulation plane.
According to a detailed map of neural connections in C. ele-
gans (53–55), the head and neck body muscles are innervated by
the nerve ring motor neurons, which synapse onto cells in indi-
vidual quadrants (and thus are capable to actuate each quadrant
individually). In contrast, the remaining body muscles are inner-
vated only by the ventral-cord motor neurons, which synapse
onto muscles of either two ventral or two dorsal quadrants,
consistent with 2D actuation.
Based on this topology of neural connections, it is generally
assumed that only the head and neck segments can perform 3D
motion. However, the stereoscopic experiments by Kwon et al.
(33) clearly show that burrowing nematodes can adopt a vari-
ety of 3D postures. The images clearly show that the entire body
undergoes out-of-plane deformations. In the swimming case the
evidence is less conclusive because stereoscopic images are not
yet available. Nonetheless, 2D images of swimming nematodes
(such as the one shown in Fig. 8A) agree with our 3D body
posture model.
Our hydrodynamic calculations of the roll dynamics further
support a conclusion that the entire nematode body partici-
pates in generating the roll motion. We ﬁnd that the torsional
wave propagating throughout the entire body length can pro-
duce a 90◦roll in less than one undulation period, consistent
with rolls observed in our laboratory experiments using wild-
type C. elegans. In contrast, a stroke in which only the head and
neck segments are displaced out of the undulation plane pro-
duces signiﬁcantly weaker rolls. The results of these additional
simulations are presented in Analysis of a Roll Resulting from
Out-of-Plane Displacements of the Nematode Head.
C
A
B
Fig. 11.
Mechanism of hydrodynamic enhancement of axial roll rotation.
A shows a side view and B and C a front view of nematode trajectories
in a roll maneuver. The labeling convention follows that of Fig. 10. In B
and C the axis of motion (toward the viewer) is indicated by the sym-
bol ⊙. In forward locomotion (A) the longitudinal hydrodynamic resistance
FH (red arrows) slows the nematode down. During the torsional roll (B
and C), the net torque TH (magenta arrows in C) associated with FH (red
arrows) produces hydrodynamic rotation (blue arrow in B) in the same
direction as the geometrical rotation of the undulation plane (progression
0 →1 →2).
Bilbao et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 16
|
E3623

We hypothesize that the generation of a nonzero torsion in the
posterior part of the nematode body involves a 3D propriocep-
tive feedback, which enables propagation of the torsional wave
from the head segment in the posterior direction. The existence
of 2D proprioceptive feedback in C. elegans and its impor-
tant role in generation of a planar undulation wave have been
demonstrated by Wen et al. (4). Based on this result and build-
ing on their observation that individual neurons of C. elegans
may have a high degree of functional complexity, we conjecture
that 3D proprioception may give rise to asymmetric neural sig-
nals and differential muscular contractions that are needed to
achieve well-controlled out-of-plane body movements during the
torsional roll.
We note that current evidence is not sufﬁcient to rule out a
passive, purely mechanical origin of propagation of 3D deforma-
tions along the portion of the nematode body outside the head
and neck regions. In particular, the body shapes observed during
burrowing (33) can, in principle, be generated by 3D actuation
of the head and neck muscles, with the rest of the body pas-
sively sliding along the tunnel carved by the nematode head.
Such motion, however, would be inefﬁcient, especially in media
with low-yield stress, in which transverse forces needed to pas-
sively deform the nematode body would result in undesirable
transverse slip.
Since C. elegans has a four-quadrant muscle arrangement that
is anatomically capable of generating 3D body deformations, we
expect that there is a compatible neuromuscular-control system
that allows the nematode to fully use this (existing) muscle struc-
ture. Further analyses of 3D locomotion of C. elegans will help
determine whether such a control system exists and how it may
actuate the nematode body.
Materials and Methods
Imaging of Swimming Nematodes Performing Rolls and Turns in Water. Wild-
type C. elegans were used to record the 3D swimming. Worms were cultured
in a nematode growth medium plate seeded with the bacteria Escherichia
coli OP50 at 20 ◦C. A liquid pool was created for the swimming assay by
adding 5–7 mL of M9 buffer into a 60-mm Petri dish. The pool height was
∼2 mm. The surface of the Petri dish was treated with 5% Pluoronic F127
for 5 min before adding M9 buffer. Individual young adults were manually
transferred into a liquid pool of M9 buffer, using a worm pick. Swimming
episodes were recorded at 30 frames per second using an SVSI camera and
Zeiss Stemi 2000-C stereo microscope imaging system at 1.6× magniﬁcation
with a pixel resolution of 0.21 pixels/µm. All imaging was carried out in a
food-free environment at 20 ◦C.
Assessing Buoyancy Effects in 3D Swimming. A mixed culture of worms (L1–L3
larvae and adults) was used to observe the voluntary 3D movement of sed-
imenting nematodes in water and in 10% dextran solution (Dextran 2000
from Leuconostoc spp.) of viscosity 50.2 cP at 20 ◦C. Settling of a mixed
worm population was observed in a BrandTech Macro Cuvette. Worms were
washed from a plate and concentrated in 200 µL of M9 solution. In each
experiment, 50 µL of the worm solution (∼50–100 worms) was added at
the top surface of the ﬂuid in the cuvette and allowed to settle under
the inﬂuence of gravity. Worms were recorded for the entire settling path
(4.5 cm).
We observed that in water the sedimentation velocity of adult worms
was comparable to the active swimming velocity, and the nematodes set-
tled toward the bottom of the cuvette. In contrast, many larvae did not
settle and remained in the top layer of ﬂuid even after 10 min. In the dex-
tran solution the settling velocity was negligible for both adults and larvae.
Nematodes changed the undulation plane using roll maneuvers every 2 to 3
undulations. The rate of planar turns was much slower (∼10 undulations per
turn, consistent with results from ref. 34). No evidence of gravity-induced
passive reorientations was found in either experiment; therefore we con-
clude that the effect of buoyancy forces on reorientation maneuvers is
negligible.
Description of Planar Nematode Postures. Based on our prior quantitative
analysis of nematode shapes (28), in our turn and roll-rotation angle calcu-
lations we use qL = 9 for the W-shaped basic crawling/burrowing gait and
qL = 5.5 for the C-shaped swimming gait. These values are within the range
of wavelength variability reported in ref. 25. Since in crawling and burrow-
ing without transverse slip the resistance forces are of the same magnitude,
we assume that the 3D burrowing and crawling gaits have similar parame-
ter values, consistent with the available experimental images of burrowing
C. elegans (33).
Modeling of Nematode Hydrodynamics. In our numerical simulations of
swimming nematodes we use a 3D generalization of the bead-based model
introduced in ref. 29. Accordingly, a swimming nematode is represented as
an active chain of N hydrodynamically coupled spherical beads arranged
along the nematode centerline. As the conﬁguration of a chain submerged
in a viscous ﬂuid evolves, the beads i = 1, . . . , N move with the linear and
angular velocities
ui = ua
i + urb
i ,
[7]
ωi = ωa
i + ωrb,
[8]
which are decomposed into the active and passive components.
The active linear velocity ua
i corresponds to the sliding motion of the bead
along the curve deﬁned by the curvature and torsion waves, Eq. 2,
ua
i = vsˆti,
[9]
where ˆti is the unit tangent vector at the position of bead i, and vs is the
velocity of the curvature wave propagating along the nematode body. The
active angular bead velocity
ωa
i = κ(si)ˆbi + τ(si)ˆti
[10]
depends on the curvature κ, torsion τ, and the binormal unit vector ˆbi at the
bead position si. The angular velocity Eq. 10 mimics the rotational motion of
individual segments of the deforming nematode body. As explained in our
previous paper (29), neglecting the active rotational contribution results in
an overprediction of nematode swimming speed, especially for large qL.
The passive linear and angular velocities of individual beads,
urb
i = urb + ωrb × Ri,
[11]
ωrb
i = ωrb,
[12]
are associated with the rigid-body translation and rotation of the entire
chain. The hydrodynamic torque, chain velocity urb, and bead positions Ri
are evaluated relative to a prescribed center of rotation of the chain.
The linear and angular chain velocities urb and ωrb are determined from
the hydrodynamic force and torque balance,
F a
T a

+
"
ˆζ
tt
ˆζ
tr
ˆζ
rt
ˆζ
rr
#
·
"
urb
ωrb
#
= 0,
[13]
where F a and T a are the active torque and force required to produce the
prescribed chain motion, Eqs. 9 and 10, and ˆζ
αβ (α, β = t, r) are transla-
tional (t) and rotational (r) hydrodynamic resistance tensors of the chain at
a current conﬁguration.
Expressions for the active force F a, active torque T a, and the hydro-
dynamic resistance tensors ˆζ
αβ in terms of the hydrodynamic resistance
and mobility tensors of a system of hydrodynamically coupled beads are
given in ref. 29. The calculations presented in our paper were performed
using a generalized Rotne–Prager–Yamakawa (RPY) approximation (56) for
multiparticle hydrodynamic interactions. A limited set of calculations was
also performed using a more accurate but computationally more expen-
sive Hydromultipole algorithm (57); for our current problem, the RPY
approximation produces fairly accurate results. The nematode body was
modeled using a chain of N = 30 beads. We note that in an independent
study Berman et al. (42) also used a hydrodynamic bead-based model to
investigate undulatory swimming of a nematode.
Evaluation of the Roll Rotation Rate. The single-mode roll rotation rate per
period of undulations, ωroll, was determined from the angle between the
binormal vectors at s = 0 and s = 2π/q.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. N. J. Szewczyk and Dr. M. Driscoll for
useful discussions. A.B. acknowledges ﬁnancial support from NSF Grant CBET
1059745 and a Texas Tech University Doctoral Dissertation Completion Fel-
lowship. J.B. was partially supported by NSF Grant CBET 1603627. S.A.V. and
M.R. acknowledge partial support from Grants NIH 1R21AG050503-01 and
NASA NNX15AL16G.
E3624
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706754115
Bilbao et al.

BIOPHYSICS AND
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY
1. Ghanbari A, et al. (2012) A micropillar-based on-chip system for continuous force
measurement of C. elegans. J Micromech Microeng 22:095009.
2. Johari S, Nock V, Alkaisi MM, Wang W (2013) On-chip analysis of C. elegans muscular
forces and locomotion patterns in microstructured environments. Lab Chip 13:1699–
1707.
3. Etheridge T, et al. (2015) The integrin-adhesome is required to maintain muscle struc-
ture, mitochondrial ATP production, and movement forces in Caenorhabditis elegans.
FASEB J 29:1235–1246.
4. Wen Q, et al. (2012) Proprioceptive coupling within motor neurons drives C. elegans
forward locomotion. Neuron 76:750–761.
5. Stirman JN, et al. (2011) Real-time multimodal optical control of neurons and muscles
in freely behaving Caenorhabditis elegans. Nat Methods 8:153–159.
6. Gray JM, Hill JJ, Bargmann CI (2005) A circuit for navigation in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:3184–3191.
7. Kocabas A, Shen CH, Guo ZV, Ramanathan S (2012) Controlling interneuron activity
in Caenorhabditis elegans to evoke chemotactic behaviour. Nature 490:273–277.
8. Sznitman J, Purohit PK, Krajacic P, Lamitina T, Arratia PE (2010) Material properties
of Caenorhabditis elegans swimming at low Reynolds number. Biophys J 98:617–626.
9. Brown AEX, Yemini EI, Grundy LJ, Jucikas T, Schafer WR (2013) A dictionary of behav-
ioral motifs reveals clusters of genes affecting Caenorhabditis elegans locomotion.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:791–796.
10. Restif C, et al. (2014) CeleST: Computer vision software for quantitative analysis of
C. elegans swim behavior reveals novel features of locomotion. PLoS Comput Biol
10:e1003702.
11. Lanza IR, et al. (2009) Endurance exercise as a countermeasure for aging. Diabetes
57:2933–2942.
12. Lanza IR, Nair KS (2009) Muscle mitochondrial changes with aging and exercise. Am J
Clin Nutr 89:467S–471S.
13. Greer EL, Brunet A (2009) Different dietary restriction regimens extend lifespan by
both independent and overlapping genetic pathways in C. elegans. Aging Cell 8:113–
127.
14. Chinsomboon J, et al. (2009) The transcriptional coactivator PGC-1α mediates
exercise-induced angiogenesis in skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:21401–
21406.
15. Kenyon CJ (2010) The genetics of ageing. Nature 464:504–512.
16. Fernandez-Marcos PJ, Auwerx J (2011) Regulation of PGC-1α, a nodal regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis. Am J Clin Nutr 93:884S–890S.
17. Chuang HS, Kuo WJ, Lee CL, Chu IH, Chen CS (2016) Exercise in an electrotactic ﬂow
chamber ameliorates age-related degeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci Rep
6:28064.
18. Artal-Sanz M, de Jong L, Tavernarakis N (2006) Caenorhabditis elegans: A versatile
platform for drug discovery. Biotechnol J 1:1405–1418.
19. Omura DT, Clark DA, Samuel ADT, Horvitz HR (2012) Dopamine signaling is essential
for precise rates of locomotion by C. elegans. PLoS One 7:e38649.
20. Voorhies W, Fuchs J, Thomas S (2005) The longevity of Caenorhabditis elegans in soil.
Biol Lett 1:247–249.
21. Frezal L, Felix M (2015) The natural history of model organisms: C. elegans outside
the petri dish. eLife 4:e05849.
22. Stephens GJ, Johnson-Kerner B, Bialek W, Ryu WS (2008) Dimensionality and dynamics
in the behavior of C. elegans. PLoS Comput Biol 4:e1000028.
23. Berri S, Boyle JH, Tassieri M, Hope IA, Cohen N (2009) Forward locomotion of the
nematode C. elegans is achieved through modulation of a single gait. HFSP J 3:186–
193.
24. Cohen N, Boyle JH (2010) Swimming at low Reynolds number: A beginners guide to
undulatory locomotion. Contemp Phys 51:103–123.
25. Fang-Yen C, et al. (2010) Biomechanical analysis of gait adaptation in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:20323–20328.
26. Sznitman J, Shen X, Purohit PK, Arratia PE (2010) The effects of ﬂuid viscosity on the
kinematics and material properties of C. elegans swimming at low Reynolds number.
Exp Mech 50:1303–1311.
27. Stephens GJ, de Mesquita MB, Ryu WS, Bialek W (2011) Emergence of long timescales
and stereotyped behaviors in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
108:7286–7289.
28. Padmanabhan V, et al. (2012) Locomotion of C. elegans: A piecewise-harmonic
curvature representation of nematode behavior. PLoS One 7:e40121.
29. Bilbao A, Wajnryb E, Vanapalli SA, Blawzdziewicz J (2013) Nematode locomotion in
unconﬁned and conﬁned ﬂuids. Phys Fluids 25:081902.
30. Yuan J, Raizen DM, Bau HH (2015) A hydrodynamic mechanism for attraction of
undulatory microswimmers to surfaces (bordertaxis). J R Soc Interface 12:20150227.
31. Yuan J, Raizen DM, Bau HH (2015) Propensity of undulatory swimmers, such as worms,
to go against the ﬂow. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:3606–3611.
32. Montenegro-Johnson TD, Gagnon DA, Arratia PE, Lauga E (2016) Flow analysis of the
low Reynolds number swimmer C. elegans. Phys Rev Fluids 1:053202.
33. Kwon N, Pyo J, Lee S, Je J (2013) 3-D worm tracker for freely moving C. elegans. PLoS
One 8:e57484.
34. Beron C, et al. (2015) The burrowing behavior of the nematode Caenorhabditis ele-
gans: A new assay for the study of neuromuscular disorders. Genes Brain Behav
14:357–368.
35. Vidal-Gadea A, et al. (2015) Magnetosensitive neurons mediate geomagnetic
orientation in Caenorhabditis elegans. eLife 4:e07493.
36. Kwon N, Hwang AB, You YJ, Lee SJV, Je JH (2015) Dissection of C. elegans behavioral
genetics in 3-D environments. Sci Rep 5:9564.
37. Majmudar T, Keaveny E, Zhang J, Shelley M (2012) Experiments and theory of
undulatory locomotion in a simple structured medium. J R Soc Interface 9:1809–1823.
38. Kim D, Park S, Mahadevan L, Shin JH (2011) The shallow turn of a worm. J Exp Biol
214:1554–1559.
39. Broekmans OD, Rodgers JB, Ryu WS, Stephens GJ (2016) Resolving coiled shapes
reveals new reorientation behaviors in C. elegans. eLife 5:e17227.
40. Albrecht DR, Bargmann CI (2011) High-content behavioral analysis of Caenorhabditis
elegans in precise spatiotemporal chemical environments. Nat Methods 8:599–605.
41. Gray J (1953) Undulatory propulsion. J Cell Sci 94:551–578.
42. Berman RS, Kenneth O, Sznitman J, Leshansky AM (2013) Undulatory locomotion of
ﬁnite ﬁlaments: Lessons from C. elegans. New J Phys 15:075022.
43. Sznitman J, Shen X, Sznitman R, Arratia PE (2010) Propulsive force measurements
and ﬂow behavior of undulatory swimmers at low Reynolds number. Phys Fluids 22:
12901.
44. Husson SJ, Costa WS, Schmitt C, Gottschalk A (2013) Keeping track of worm trackers.
WormBook, 10.1895/wormbook.1.156.1.
45. Stoker J (1969) Differential Geometry (Wiley, New York).
46. Bilbao A (2016) Modeling the locomotion of Caenorhabditis elegans: Undulatory
propulsion and maneuverability in ﬂuids. PhD thesis (Texas Tech University, Lubbock,
TX).
47. Deng X, Xu J (2014) A 3d undulatory locomotion model inspired by C. elegans through
DNN approach. Neurocomputing 131:248–264.
48. Shen XN, Arratia PE (2011) Undulatory swimming in viscoelastic ﬂuids. Phys Rev Lett
106:208101.
49. Gagnon DA, Shen XN, Arratia PE (2013) Undulatory swimming in ﬂuids with polymer
networks. EPL 104:14004.
50. Gagnon DA, Keim NC, Arratia PE (2014) Undulatory swimming in shear-thinning
ﬂuids: Experiments with Caenorhabditis elegans. J Fluid Mech 758:R3.
51. Park JS, Kim D, Shin JH, Weitz DA (2016) Efﬁcient nematode swimming in a shear
thinning colloidal suspension. Soft Matter 12:1892–1897.
52. Yuan J, Ko H, Raizen DM, Bau HH (2016) Terrain following and applications:
Caenorhabditis elegans swims along the ﬂoor using a bump and undulate strategy. J
R Soc Interface 13:20160612.
53. Altun ZF, Hall DH (2009) Muscle system, somatic muscle. WormAtlas, 10.3908/wormat-
las.1.7.
54. White JG, Southgate E, Thomson JN, Brenner S (1986) The structure of the nervous-
system of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
314:1–340.
55. Ugural AC, Fenster SK (1997) C. elegans II (Cold Spring Harbor Lab Press, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY), 2nd Ed.
56. Wajnryb
E, Mizerski
KA, Zuk PJ,
Szymczak P
(2013) Generalization
of
the
Rotne-Prager-Yamakawa mobility and shear disturbance tensors. J Fluid Mech 731:R3.
57. Cichocki B, Felderhof BU, Hinsen K, Wajnryb E, Bławzdziewicz J (1994) Friction and
mobility of many spheres in Stokes ﬂow. J Chem Phys 100:3780–3790.
Bilbao et al.
PNAS
|
vol. 115
|
no. 16
|
E3625
