Perspective
Routine omics collection is a golden
opportunity for European human research
in space and analog environments
Henry Cope,1 Craig R.G. Willis,2,3,17 Matthew J. MacKay,4 Lindsay A. Rutter,5 Li Shean Toh,6 Philip M. Williams,6
Rau´ l Herranz,7 Joseph Borg,8 Daniela Bezdan,9,10,11 Stefania Giacomello,12 Masafumi Muratani,5
Christopher E. Mason,4,13,14,15 Timothy Etheridge,16 and Nathaniel J. Szewczyk1,2,3,*
1School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Derby DE22 3DT, UK
2Department of Biomedical Sciences, Heritage College of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA
3Ohio Musculoskeletal and Neurological Institute, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA
4Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
5Transborder Medical Research Center, and Department of Genome Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8575, Japan
6School of Pharmacy, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
7Centro de Investigaciones Biolo´ gicas Margarita Salas (CSIC), 28040 Madrid, Spain
8Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, Msida MSD 2080, Malta
9Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of T€ubingen, T€ubingen, Germany
10NGS Competence Center T€ubingen (NCCT), University of T€ubingen, T€ubingen, Germany
11yuri GmbH, Meckenbeuren, Germany
12Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 17165 Stockholm, Sweden
13The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY, USA
14WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
15The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA
16Department of Sport and Health Science, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX1 2LU, UK
17School of Chemistry and Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford BD7 1DP, UK
*Correspondence: szewczyk@ohio.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2022.100550
SUMMARY
Widespread generation and analysis of omics data have revolutionized molecular medicine on Earth, yet its
power to yield new mechanistic insights and improve occupational health during spaceﬂight is still to be fully
realized in humans. Nevertheless, rapid technological advancements and ever-regular spaceﬂight programs
mean that longitudinal, standardized, and cost-effective collection of human space omics data are ﬁrmly
within reach. Here, we consider the practicality and scientiﬁc return of different sampling methods and
omic types in the context of human spaceﬂight. We also appraise ethical and legal considerations pertinent
to omics data derived from European astronauts and spaceﬂight participants (SFPs). Ultimately, we propose
that a routine omics collection program in spaceﬂight and analog environments presents a golden oppor-
tunity. Unlocking this bright future of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI)-driven analyses and personalized medicine
THE BIGGER PICTURE
Omic proﬁling of European human subjects in space—whether they be governmental
or commercial—is primed to revolutionize space medicine, as it has with medicine on Earth. Improved occu-
pational healthcare will be important for reducing risk and increasing mission success in ambitious en-
deavors, including voyages to Mars.
We believe that collaborative steps should be taken today to design a standardized data resource, which will
continue to be useful in the future, as data science approaches evolve. From this perspective, we introduce con-
siderations for a routineomics program for Europeans inspace. Theseinclude which datatypes to collect,which
sampling methods to use, andat which time points.Ethicalandlegal considerationsof European personal omics
data in the context of astronauts are also discussed, with the goal of creating a policy landscape where data can
be as open as possible to maximize scientiﬁc potential but as closed as necessary to protect the data subjects.
Concept: Basic principles of a new
data science output observed and reported
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022 ª 2022 The Authors.
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

approaches will require further investigation into best practices, including policy design and standardization
of omics data, metadata, and sampling methods.
INTRODUCTION
In 1978, Vladimı´r Remek of the Czech Republic became the
ﬁrst human from the European Union to cross the boundary
into outer space. Since then, astronauts from an array of Euro-
pean countries have followed suit (Figure 1A), with many of
these trips occurring on board the International Space Station
(ISS) since its ﬁrst occupation at the turn of the millennium.
Despite a steady increase in the number of European astro-
nauts venturing beyond Earth (Figure 1B), astronauts remain
a relatively scarce population. Each astronaut, therefore, pre-
sents a rare and unique opportunity to directly study the impact
of spaceﬂight on the human body, mind, and spirit. Addition-
ally, with the emergence of commercial spaceﬂight, and Euro-
pean citizens already ﬂying to space via these programs (e.g.,
Axiom Mission 1 and Blue Origin NS-16), there is an emerging
opportunity to expand the population of European human sub-
jects who can be studied in space.1 The spaceﬂight environ-
ment is characterized by simultaneous exposure to stressors,
including
cosmic
radiation,
altered
gravity, isolation,
and
conﬁnement within a closed environment.2 Additionally, de-
mand on the human body changes dynamically throughout
different time points within a typical spaceﬂight mission,
including pre-ﬂight
training, launch, extravehicular activity
(EVA), landing, and post-ﬂight rehabilitation.
To date, studies of astronauts have shown that long-duration
spaceﬂight induces multisystem physiological deconditioning,
such as degradation of muscle and bone,3,4 and detrimental
changes to the eye, known as spaceﬂight-associated neuro-
ocular syndrome (SANS).5 However, the precise mechanisms
behind these responses are yet to be fully understood, largely
due to the pace and practicalities of conducting comprehen-
sive molecular studies in astronauts. Biological changes and
associated medical risks during spaceﬂight missions, including
in the commercial spaceﬂight setting, have recently been re-
viewed elsewhere.1,2,6 The European Space Agency (ESA)
and other space agencies have historically taken two comple-
mentary approaches to accelerate the understanding of molec-
ular causes of biological changes in astronauts: translational
research and space analog research. Translational research
utilizes model organisms, including rodents, for molecular
studies in space,7 with the aim of understanding and coun-
tering detrimental physiological changes in astronauts. Space
analog research utilizes facilities on Earth, which enable one
to study individual aspects of the spaceﬂight environment
without having to conduct studies in space. In the context of
human research, this can include studying inactivity via bedrest
studies and isolation via use of remote research stations, such
as Concordia.8
At the 2022 European Space Summit, the European Associ-
ation of Space Explorers called for the development of Euro-
pean vehicles for transporting humans into space. Irrespective
of whether or not this becomes a near- to medium-term real-
ity, not only will ESA astronauts continue to regularly ﬂy to the
ISS but also they will ﬂy in future exploration missions with in-
ternational partners. One such example is the Artemis 2
mission to the moon, which could occur as early as 2025.
The new generation of spacecraft used for these missions is
likely to have highly limited cargo capacity; therefore, counter-
measures, such as the Advanced Resistive Exercise Device
(ARED), used on board the ISS to suppress muscle and
bone loss, may not be suitable.9 Additionally, during these
exploration missions, astronauts will venture beyond low
Earth orbit (LEO) for the ﬁrst time since the end of the Apollo
program in 1972. Within LEO, the Earth’s magnetosphere pro-
vides
partial
protection
against
radiation;
thus,
humans
venturing beyond this will experience greater exposure to
solar particle event radiation and ionizing galactic cosmic ra-
diation.2,10,11 Although there is a lack of data on the molecular
effects of the beyond LEO environment, an increase in radia-
tion-associated health risks is almost a certainty.12–14 Further
considerations of future missions beyond LEO include health
risks associated with unprecedentedly long-duration mis-
sions, lunar dust,15 and EVA.2 To the latter point, in the case
of a Mars mission, the crew would likely need to safely
perform EVA tasks in partial gravity (0.38 g) following long-
duration spaceﬂight, without the extensive rehabilitation sup-
port available on Earth.9,16
With these new spacecraft and mission plans, it will be crucial
to assess compatible countermeasures, while also gaining
greater insight into the new challenges to human health posed
by environments where biological and molecular adaptations
remain uncharted. A key challenge for translational research
from a European standpoint is that the ESA does not currently
have rodent research facilities in space, and it seems unlikely
that such facilities will be rapidly developed for future exploration
vehicles. Thus, new approaches that do not depend on rodent
research facilities should be considered by ESA. In this context,
a salient opportunity for space analog research is to harmonize
measures and endpoints between research in analog environ-
ments and in space, increasing ﬁdelity. For example, the efﬁcacy
of new countermeasures could be evaluated in both environ-
ments, and the efﬁcacy of rehabilitation following long-duration
spaceﬂight16 could be studied and improved by testing novel
rehabilitation techniques following long-duration bedrest. For
these reasons, it could prove cost effective for the ESA to pursue
an approach that focuses on improved capabilities for research
on astronauts themselves and with increased harmonization of
data and endpoint measures obtained in space and analog
environments.
On Earth, medicine has undergone a revolution through the
widespread generation and analysis of multiple omic data types,
including genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics. The
strength of omic-based, data-driven approaches is their power
to discover unanticipated effects, elucidate molecular mecha-
nisms, and generate novel hypotheses to guide follow-up tar-
geted studies.17,18 In scientiﬁc studies on Earth, omic-derived
molecular changes are regularly correlated with performance
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

metrics to uncover molecular drivers of physiological change.19
Omics have also become a valuable tool for clinical practice. For
example, the National Health Service (NHS) in the UK (1) routinely
offers all newborn babies blood spot test screening for several
genomic-based disorders, including sickle cell disease, cystic
ﬁbrosis, congenital hypothyroidism, and six inherited metabolic
diseases; (2) recently launched a pilot project with Genomics
to evaluate incorporating polygenic risk factor data into the clin-
ical risk assessment for cardiovascular disease; and (3) recently
approved use of personalized medications for treating cystic
ﬁbrosis based on the nature of the mutation(s) present in the pa-
tient’s cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR) encoding gene. Furthermore, the COVID-19 pandemic
has highlighted how omics can rapidly be employed in combina-
tion with clinical data to determine risk of severe disease course,
identify potential underlying mechanisms of susceptibility, and
identify potential personalized treatments.20
Although omics have become a signiﬁcant part of scientiﬁc
research and standard clinical practice on Earth, for humans in
space, omics are a relatively new and untapped technology. Be-
tween March 2015 and March 2016, NASA conducted the sem-
inal Twins Study. The study monitored an astronaut during a
1-year mission in space, while the astronaut’s identical twin re-
mained on Earth as a control. Both subjects were comprehen-
sively proﬁled using multiomic measures across several time
points pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight, and post-ﬂight. Spaceﬂight-induced
changes were detected across multiple systems, with most of
these alterations returning to baseline levels post-ﬂight.21 The
longitudinal proﬁling of the NASA Twins Study and similar
proﬁling on the recent short-duration SpaceX Inspiration4 com-
mercial mission demonstrate that multiomics proﬁling of astro-
nauts is feasible. Accordingly, NASA has recently announced
that they have elected to add omics to the standard measures
program for the ISS, which ESA astronauts can opt into. NASA’s
standard measures program also routinely collects select phys-
iological measures and select biomarkers from blood and urine;
commercial spaceﬂight missions are similarly exploring these
possibilities. For example, the Translational Research Institute
for Space Health (TRISH), a partner of NASA’s Human Research
Program, recently created a database for commercial space-
ﬂight health data, including crew omics data from the Inspira-
tion4 mission.22 It is, therefore, important that the ESA also
explores these new opportunities, leveraging existing expertise
in European spaceﬂight omics23 and facilities for human subjects
research. To that end, the key question is how best to develop a
routine longitudinal omics program for European astronauts and/
or European spaceﬂight participants (SFPs).
A routine omics collection program could be viewed as an
initiative to develop a high-value data resource, which can be
analyzed with ever-evolving big data approaches, thereby
improving ESA’s artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) readiness. Access to
sensitive data collected during the program would need to be
controlled so that scientiﬁc research is supported, while protect-
ing the rights of the subjects. Such a program could help to eluci-
date key molecular drivers behind spaceﬂight health issues,
which could lead to improved risk quantiﬁcation and approaches
to spaceﬂight occupational health. One example of how this
could be used is for the development of evidence-based recom-
mendations on training and medical standards for spaceﬂight;
these standards will become especially important as the space-
faring population increases in heterogeneity and begins to
include humans with pre-existing conditions.1,6 Furthermore, a
routine omics program could be used as a basis for personalized
medicine approaches. As an example, researchers have previ-
ously found that genetic variations in one-carbon metabolism
genes may contribute to susceptibility to SANS in astronauts,24
and other genomic studies have shown individual variability
associated with spaceﬂight-relevant factors, including bone
mineral density and radiation sensitivity.1 Pre-ﬂight genomic
screening of astronauts, therefore, holds potential in developing
Astronaut Representation:
Yes
No
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Year of First Mission
Astronauts (Cumulative)
A
B
Figure 1. European astronaut population
The distribution and population of European astronauts who have crossed the Ka´ rma´ n line (as of 9/20/21).
(A) Geographically highlights the range of nationalities of European astronaut.
(B) Shows the cumulative population of European astronauts over time, based on astronauts’ ﬁrst mission into outer space.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
3
Perspective

personalized medicine approaches to risk assessment and
countermeasures, including pharmacogenomics and nutrige-
nomics.17,25,26 Pharmacogenomics aims to optimize medication
therapy, with respect to the patient’s genomic data, to ensure
maximum efﬁcacy with minimal adverse effects. For example,
a study of medication on board the ISS found that the meta-
bolism of approximately a third of the drugs in the ISS repository
were affected by polymorphic metabolizing enzymes.27 Through
further data collection, cargo could potentially be optimized to
only include the best available medication for the individual
crewmembers, reducing costs and adverse drug reaction/ther-
apy failure risk.28 Furthermore, omics could prove valuable for
longitudinal health monitoring during spaceﬂight. For example,
TRISH recently suggested that omics could be used alongside
other datasets obtained via point-of-care (POC) devices to
diagnose approximately one-third of NASA’s list of medical con-
ditions that are of concern for deep-space missions.29 Finally,
discoveries obtained using human-research-derived omics
data could beneﬁt health on Earth. For example, the World
Health Organization has listed physical inactivity as the fourth
leading risk factor for global mortality, estimated to have been
responsible for 9% of global premature mortality in 2008.30 Me-
chanical unloading of the musculoskeletal system due to micro-
gravity during spaceﬂight, or due to immobilization or reduced
step count in analog environments, induces similar effects to
physical inactivity, such as muscle atrophy and altered glucose
handling; thus, discoveries and countermeasures developed
for astronauts and/or SFPs could prove useful for terrestrial ef-
forts against physical inactivity.
CONSIDERATIONS FOR A EUROPEAN SPACE
RESEARCH ROUTINE OMICS PROGRAM
Designing an appropriate routine omics collection program for
European astronauts and/or SFPs requires careful consideration
of a number of factors. In this section, we discuss some of the
key considerations, including collecting data with AI in mind,
which sampling methods and omics data types should be
collected based on practicality and perceived scientiﬁc return,
and which ethical and legal challenges may need to be ad-
dressed.
AI readiness of omics data and metadata
Collecting the same standardized measures routinely from as-
tronauts and/or SFPs across multiple missions would greatly
improve the AI readiness of the generated datasets, especially
when combined with accompanying standardized metadata,
including spacecraft environmental measures (e.g., radiation
dosimetry).7,31 One important practical consideration here will
be digital storage requirements, because omics experiments
generate large volumes of data. Similarly, harmonizing ap-
proaches with other space agencies will be important. In this
context, there is an opportunity for the ESA to expand collabora-
tion with the Frontier Development Lab, which it currently part-
ners with to assist with AI approaches to Earth Observation
and that is also currently partnered with NASA to assist with AI
approaches across the entire Science Mission Directorate. In
pursuit of AI readiness, it will be important to adhere to guide-
lines, such as well-implemented FAIR (ﬁndable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable) principles where possible,32,33
which could include machine-interpretable ﬁle formats, such
as standardized processed omic data,18,34 alongside raw data
and metadata. In order to further enhance the quantity of data,
identical measures could be collected from well-designed,
ground-based analog studies, to facilitate comparison and to
unlock powerful machine learning (ML) techniques based on
transfer learning. With the ever-increasing adoption and utility
of AI-based approaches for healthcare and life sciences
research,35 the importance of designing data collection and
curation with AI capabilities in mind cannot be overstated. For
example, it may eventually be possible to develop omic-based
digital twin approaches to be used in applications, such as
mission planning and countermeasure design. These ap-
proaches could model the physiological impact that mission pa-
rameters, such as duration and radiation exposure, may have on
individual astronauts.36,37 Although there are a few interesting
exceptions, at present, most AI approaches require large vol-
umes of high-quality and domain-relevant training data.38–40
Notably, robust population-based analyses will be particularly
challenging to achieve for humans in space, given their rarity. It
is, therefore, important to initiate collection and curation of stan-
dardized astronaut and/or SFP omics data and metadata as
soon as possible, thereby unlocking a future of powerful AI-
based omic analyses for personalized medicine approaches
and mechanistic discovery.
Omic data types
A key consideration for implementing a routine omics program
will be selecting a panel of omic assays to capture from human
subjects. Omics is increasingly being used as shorthand for
big data approaches in biology and medicine, with numerous
different omic data types and technologies now available at
decreasing costs. Different omics data types and technologies
offer both overlapping and unique insights into molecular
changes within the body.18 Integrating multiple omic types (i.e.,
‘‘multiomics’’) via systems biology approaches can lead to a
more holistic picture of spaceﬂight-associated molecular pat-
terns.41 Initial multiomics studies during the NASA Twins mission
and SpaceX Inspiration4 mission have opted for a relatively
broad approach to assay selection.21 It makes sense to use ﬁnd-
ings from these missions to optimize a panel of assays for routine
omics. This harmonized approach would also support compara-
bility between data captured via a European routine omics pro-
gram and these initial international studies. To further support
comparability, it also seems logical to collect data types that
are prevalent in large-scale terrestrial omic initiatives, such as
The Cancer Genome Atlas and the European Genome-phenome
Archive. The ability to easily compare astronaut data with terres-
trial disease cohorts could allow for the identiﬁcation of similar
patterns, which could aid processes, such as countermeasure
design (e.g., omic-based drug repurposing).42 While collecting
the same measures over a long period of time is desirable,
some ﬂexibility is to be expected due to the continued evolution
of omic technologies.
Although coverage of all potential omic types and tech-
nologies is beyond the scope of this article, there are a few clear
candidates worth noting. The most immediately actionable
and cost-effective measure in terms of healthcare will likely be
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

pre-ﬂight
genomic
screening,43
such
as
whole-genome
sequencing (WGS). For example, a recent proof-of-concept
study by the Mayo Clinic found that pre-emptive use of basic
pharmacogenomic testing, alongside participants’ medication
history, enabled pharmacists to offer medication improvement
opportunities in 56% of participants.44 Some of the medications
involved in the study (e.g., ondansetron, metoprolol, aripipra-
zole, sertraline, and phenytoin) have been documented as being
part of the ISS medication kit.27 Thus, pre-ﬂight genomic
screening could potentially be used to inform medication man-
agement and personalized medicine approaches to spaceﬂight
countermeasures.25 Similarly, microbiomic approaches, such
as studying the genomic makeup of microbial communities via
metagenomics, are likely to have high clinical relevance for hu-
mans in space. Metagenomic analyses of crew samples can
be used to study microbiome shifts2 and potential health conse-
quences, such as viral (e.g., herpes) reactivation and skin
rashes;45,46 the addition of environmental samples to study mi-
crobial interactions between crew members and the spacecraft
environment would also be useful for monitoring crew health
(e.g., infectious disease management).47,48 On board the ISS,
at least some coverage of metagenomics would likely fall under
NASA’s microbial monitoring program. Other candidate omic
data types for studying regulatory molecular changes, discov-
ering biomarkers, and designing interventions for spaceﬂight-
associated health risks include transcriptomics, epigenomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics18 (Figure 2).
Sampling time points
Due to the dynamic nature of physiological changes throughout
the course of a typical spaceﬂight mission, it is scientiﬁcally
meaningful to acquire omic measures across an array of time
points. At a minimum, a sampling point just before ﬂight and a
sampling point taken shortly after the mission would prove useful
for quantifying the molecular impact of the spaceﬂight mission.
However, averaging multiple pre-ﬂight measures would be valu-
able for establishing a robust molecular baseline, and multiple
post-ﬂight measures would prove useful for studying recovery
and long-term health. To the latter point, long-term (i.e.,
‘‘lifetime’’) post-ﬂight time points will be particularly valuable
for missions beyond LEO, to study whether the human body fully
recovers from spaceﬂight environmental factors, such as DNA
damage response following the increased radiation dosage. To
that point, it has recently been reported, albeit in a single pair
of monozygotic twin astronauts, that onset of clonal hematopoi-
esis may be inﬂuenced by spaceﬂight.50 Clonal hematopoiesis
results in lifelong changes in the blood that are associated with
increased risk of cardiovascular disease and blood cancers.
The addition of in-ﬂight measures, particularly for long-dura-
tion missions, would provide greater temporal resolution, allow-
ing for spaceﬂight-induced molecular changes to be monitored
over time. As a starting point, it may make sense to focus time
points around expected points of signiﬁcant physiological
change, especially when clinically relevant. Signiﬁcant physio-
logical changes can occur rapidly, so early in-ﬂight time points
could be useful for studying their onset. For example, the ﬁrst
in-ﬂight time point for the NASA Twins Study was at 14 days
into the ﬂight,21 whereas spaceﬂight research has indicated
that signiﬁcant physiological changes can occur before this point
and, thus, earlier time points may be valuable. For instance, a
recent study investigating anemia in astronauts collected blood
and exhaled air samples at 5 ± 1 days into the 6-month ﬂights
and results already indicated signiﬁcantly increased breakdown
of red blood cells (hemolysis). Markers for increased hemolysis
persisted throughout the in-ﬂight time points (11 ± 1, 64 ± 5,
and 157 ± 31 days), with 5 of 13 astronauts reaching clinical
levels of anemia when measured 4 ± 1 days after landing.51
The potential implication that the longer the duration in space,
the worse certain health risks, including anemia, suggests that
in-ﬂight time points across the full duration of spaceﬂight
Genomics
Transcriptomics
Epigenomics
Proteomics
Metabolomics
DNA
RNA
Protein
Metabolite
Microbiomics
Inherited 
genetic risk 
susceptibility 
to 
environmental 
stressors
Influence of 
individual 
differences in 
expression of 
the genome
Shift of 
microbial 
communities 
Post-
translational 
modifications 
Reversible modifications of genome  
Effect of 
expression 
and activitity 
of the 
functional 
units of the 
cell
Abundance of 
small 
molecule 
intermediates 
of metabolism
Figure 2. Incorporating omics into astronaut studies
Overview of how candidate omic data types for studying and counteracting astronaut health risks interact with one another, the environment, and phenotype.
Epigenomics is shown to span several omic data types to demonstrate that environmental exposures and activity occurring at the genomic, transcriptomic, and
proteomic levels inﬂuence epigenomic status. Adapted from Yu et al.49 under CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
5
Perspective

missions may be valuable. For example, other useful in-ﬂight
time points may include shortly before the end of the ﬂight, so
that this can be compared with the ﬁrst post-ﬂight time point
to measure the impact of landing and initial readaptation, and
shortly before and after EVA, to investigate the molecular impact
of such events.
The sampling schedule also has implications for occupational
health. For example, pre-ﬂight omic measures could be used as
a baseline for personalized medicine approaches. Measures
taken in ﬂight across different time points could then eventually
be compared with the baseline data with ML approaches to pre-
dict health outcomes and suggest preventative interven-
tions.37,52 Insights related to the molecular impact of mission
events, such as EVA, could also be used to inform mission
design, or indeed day-to-day task scheduling to manage stress
responses.
While frequent sample time points are desirable, it will be
important to balance the sampling schedule with regard to prac-
tical considerations, including cost, use of crew time, sample
storage space, and subject recovery time (dependent on sample
invasiveness). Additionally, if in-ﬂight time points are included in
the sampling schedule, it will be important to thoroughly train
crew members for successful sample collection.
Accompanying functional measures
It is beneﬁcial to routinely collect performance measures in
tandem with omics, such as self-assessments (e.g., cognition,
nutrition, and sleep quality), exercise outputs, and physiological
measures collected from wearables and POC devices.29,53
When combined, omic and functional measures can be used
to infer causal molecular-phenotypic links, which can then be
used to inform and test interventions and discover novel bio-
markers; if adopted, this approach would be a major advance
in research capabilities, enabling widespread hypothesis-driven
molecular mechanistic research to be conducted in astronauts.
While outside the scope of this omic-focused article, the choice
of which performance measures to collect must also be consid-
ered via an evidence-based approach, balancing scientiﬁc and
clinical value with considerations regarding practicality, such
as levels of invasiveness. Importantly, NASA’s standard mea-
sures program, which ESA astronauts can opt into, currently
captures a curated selection of standardized functional mea-
sures from astronauts on the ISS.
Sample processing
One practical consideration regarding routine omics collection is
the logistics of processing the samples. Currently, human bio-
logical samples collected on the ISS are typically preserved
(e.g., via rapid freezing) and stored before being returned to
Earth for sequencing and analysis. The multiomics proﬁling con-
ducted for the NASA Twins Study shows that this model is
feasible for longitudinal human studies on the ISS,21 yet the
approach does come with some disadvantages, including sam-
ple degradation, delays in receiving results, and dependence on
freezer space. Thus, while this approach with well-designed pro-
cedures for sample processing7 is likely to be appropriate for
routine omics on the ISS, future commercial space stations,
and short-duration missions, it may not be appropriate for all
mission types. Therefore, at least for long-duration exploration
missions, it may make sense to move toward an approach with
reduced reliance on sample return to Earth.
One step toward enabling this in-ﬂight autonomy is improving
in-ﬂight equipment capabilities, which has been demonstrated
recently via usage of the portable Oxford Nanopore MinION
sequencer on board the ISS for sequencing DNA54 and even hu-
man-derived RNA directly (Sarah Castro-Wallace, personal
communication). Using this equipment, environmental swabs
have
been
collected
in-ﬂight
and
then
processed
and
sequenced on board (swab-to-sequence).47,55 As the technol-
ogy becomes more compact and lightweight, autonomy of the
sample processing may improve further still through robotic
automation of spaceﬂight laboratories.56 One consideration is
that in-ﬂight generation of omics data presents challenges
regarding data storage and transfer back to Earth. Importantly,
downlink challenges compound with the communication delays
introduced by increasing distance from Earth. In-ﬂight computa-
tional processing of raw omics data can mitigate this issue by
signiﬁcantly reducing ﬁle size, and full-analysis pipelines have
even been executed on-orbit, eradicating the need to downlink
data to obtain results (Sarah Castro-Wallace, personal commu-
nication).
Importantly, in-ﬂight processing of omics data has implica-
tions for occupational health in space. For example, in the
context of NASA’s microbial monitoring program, in-ﬂight pro-
cessing can enable crew health to be monitored (e.g., infectious
disease diagnosis) in near real time.47,55 As another use case, re-
sults obtained in-ﬂight could eventually be inputted directly into
AI models, such as clinical decision support systems (CDSSs), to
inform the decisions of onboard medical ofﬁcers in the event that
the healthcare support teams on Earth cannot be contacted.
SAMPLING METHODS FOR SPACEFLIGHT OMICS
COLLECTION
Below, we introduce various biospecimens and sampling
methods for omics data collection (Figure 3). We focus on ap-
proaches that have spaceﬂight heritage.
Tissue biopsy
Biopsies involve the removal of a piece of solid tissue or a sample
of cells from the body. Thus, while biopsies present the gold
standard for molecular proﬁling of human physiology, such pro-
cedures are invasive in nature, require specialized expertise, are
often characterized by localized pain, and naturally carry an
increased risk of infection. It is no surprise, therefore, that routine
tissue biopsy sampling of astronauts in-ﬂight is lacking, and
omic studies in this sense remain constrained to those of
cultured human cells ﬂown to space—examples include tran-
scriptomics and/or proteomics of human-induced pluripotent
stem
cell-derived
cardiomyocytes57
and
human
intestinal
epithelial cells.58 Given the inherent challenges of human tissue
biopsy sampling in space, routine omics data collection from as-
tronauts via this tool is most immediately likely through regular
sampling programs pre- and post-ﬂight, particularly for more
readily extractable tissue types, such as skin and skeletal
muscle. Indeed, in the case of the latter, muscle biopsies have
previously been obtained from astronauts post- versus pre-ﬂight
to infer human skeletal muscle functional, morphological,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

biochemical,
and,
more
recently,
proteomic
changes
in
space.3,59–61 With the application of various omic techniques
(transcriptomics,
metabolomics,
proteomics,
epigenomics,
etc.) to biopsied skeletal muscle now being commonplace in
terrestrial human physiology research, future multiomic analyses
of astronaut muscle (and outwardly skin) obtained pre- and post-
ﬂight are entirely plausible. The existence of less-invasive (micro-
biopsy) techniques for sampling skeletal muscle62 and skin63
could make routine collection of these tissue types from astro-
nauts during ﬂight a realistic future prospect. In terms of a
more immediate scientiﬁc return, omics collection via tissue
biopsy thus lends itself as a promising tool for better understand-
ing molecular determinants of skeletal muscle and skin re-
sponses to the spaceﬂight environment.
Blood
As a minimally invasive procedure, blood sampling has long
been used as a primary alternative to tissue biopsies (i.e., ‘‘liquid
biopsy) for molecular characterization of human health on Earth.
Given the clear technical and operational advantages of blood
versus tissue sampling in the spaceﬂight environment, blood
sampling currently appears to be more viable for longitudinal
monitoring of astronaut responses at the molecular level, partic-
ularly in ﬂight. Blood samples are thus often collected from astro-
nauts for analyses on Earth, and targeted molecular proﬁling of
astronaut blood obtained before, during, and/or after spaceﬂight
has subsequently been performed on numerous occasions, with
particular emphasis on spaceﬂight-induced immune system
dysregulation.64–67 Additionally, comprehensive analyses of
astronaut blood samples from the NASA Twins Study have
yielded several new and important insights. For instance, initial
multiomic (epigenomic, metabolomic, transcriptomic, and pro-
teomic) analyses revealed wholesale gene expression changes
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and metabolite changes
in plasma during spaceﬂight that were largely normalized upon
return to Earth.21 Additional plasma proteomic proﬁling also un-
covered patient-speciﬁc exosome protein signatures following
the mission,68 with these blood samples also proving useful to-
ward conﬁrming human relevance of ﬁndings derived from
omic analysis in model organisms.69 Other independent studies
have also explored plasma metabolomic or proteomic changes
in astronauts following long-term spaceﬂight exposure.3,70,71
Routine longitudinal multiomics of astronaut blood is thus ﬁrmly
within reach. As the number of available samples across astro-
nauts and time points continues to grow, blood omics therefore
holds accelerated potential to expedite molecular understanding
of human spaceﬂight responses in areas such as immune sys-
tem dysregulation.
Urine and stool
Both normal human waste products that can be cheaply,
frequently, and non-invasively sampled without specialized
equipment or skill, urine, and stool (feces) naturally present them-
selves as strong candidate sample types for routine, longitudinal
astronaut omics collection. Indeed, alongside blood, urine is a
common form of liquid biopsy for terrestrial biomonitoring of hu-
mans, and can be used to screen for a variety of different (pa-
tho)physiological biomarkers (renal, cardiac, prostate, bone,
etc.).72–74 However, unlike blood, urine is absent of a homeostatic
mechanism and can, therefore, retain/accommodate more sub-
stances that reﬂect changes produced in vivo, while its low
complexity lends itself to straightforward detection of low-abun-
dance proteins.75 As such, urine may be considered as better
suited for early-stage biomonitoring, particularly in terms of the
kidneys.75,76 Astronaut urine omics is consequently starting to
grow, with several recent studies demonstrating the multiomic
(namely metabolomic and proteomic) potential of this sample
type for gaining new information on human body adaptations
following spaceﬂight.21,72,77,78 For instance, metabolomic/prote-
omic analyses of urine from the NASA Twins Study revealed
urinary excretion of COL1A1 and COL3A1 as potential biomarkers
of muscle, tendon, or bone changes during spaceﬂight.21 Cardio-
vascular-related
urine
proteome
changes,
including
some
associated with autonomic regulation of heart rate, have also
been delineated, offering several promising urine biomarkers for
screening cardiovascular responses to spaceﬂight.77,78
On Earth, stool has become a primary sample choice for meta-
genomic proﬁling of the gut microbiome, which plays a critical
role in the internal environment and concomitantly (patho)physi-
ological state of an individual.79–81 Recognition is now also
growing for a potential role of the gut microbiome toward phys-
iological maladaptation of astronauts during spaceﬂight.82 Meta-
genomic studies of astronaut stool have thus gained traction,
demonstrating
spaceﬂight-induced
alterations
in
both
the
composition and function of an astronaut’s gut microbiome,45,83
as well as uncovering genetic and immunological evidence for
transfer of environmental strains to an astronaut’s gut micro-
biome on board the ISS.84 Thus, astronaut stool (and outwardly
other samples; see below) metagenomics can serve as a useful
tool not only for guiding continual health monitoring but also
mission planning and habitat design.84 Future omic studies of
astronaut stool would perhaps beneﬁt from complementary
Breath condensate
Hair follicle
Blood
Stool
Urine
Saliva
Tissue biopsy
e.g. skin, muscle
Swabs
e.g. mouth, nose, ear,
skin
Invasive
Moderately/
Minimally-invasive
Non-invasive
Figure 3. Omic sampling from astronauts
The medical invasiveness of different sampling methods for spaceﬂight omics
collection from astronauts or SFPs.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
7
Perspective

metabolomics in order to improve functional readout of gut mi-
crobiome activity.85
In closing, it appears clear that stool and urine analyses could
prove practical for routine astronaut omics collection, with
strong potential for rapid scientiﬁc return.
Saliva and body swabs
While a potent contributor, the human microbiome is not merely
deﬁned by the gut but rather the full complement of microbes
(and their genes) that reside on or within the host. These mi-
crobes interact together alongside host genetics and the envi-
ronment to contribute toward an individual’s health state.86–90
Wider-ranging microbiome understanding in space is thus
essential for biomonitoring astronaut health and, as noted
above, other factors, such as habitat design. Indeed, the ISS
is a unique closed environment with rich microbial diversity91–94
which, combined with possible inﬂux and outﬂow of microor-
ganisms at times of spacecraft exchange,48 may hold potential
to have an impact on astronaut health. In terms of spaceﬂight,
saliva, nose, and mouth/buccal samples present alongside
stool as useful for providing insight on astronaut health and
physiological conditions, whereas skin and the ear are prime
sampling sites to explore interactions between an astronaut
and the spaceﬂight environment.95 Importantly, routine, longitu-
dinal metagenomics collection from all these locations is a
highly feasible prospect in the context of spaceﬂight, since all
are readily accessible for frequent non-invasive sampling via
swab (or spit sample, in the case of saliva) at little cost or
time expense and without the need for specialized skill.
Demonstrating the associated scientiﬁc potential are several
other recent metagenomic studies of astronauts, revealing
new information on host- and site-(in)dependent microbiome
responses across these various locations during spaceﬂight
as well as microbial transmission between the astronauts and
the ISS surface and vice versa.45,46,48,95,96 Thus, as comple-
mentary to stool, metagenomics collection from saliva and
body swabs should serve as a strong tool for better under-
standing molecular determinants of astronaut health in the
immediate future.
Hair
While perhaps an intriguing sample choice to note on face value,
hair as a source for omics collection may represent a useful com-
plementary source for routine biomonitoring of human physio-
logical responses to spaceﬂight. Indeed, hair is readily available
and easily sampled via extraction of hair follicles, requiring no
speciﬁc personal expertise nor complex hardware.97,98 More-
over, hair cells can reﬂect host physical conditions, including
human peripheral circadian clock and organismal metabolic re-
sponses to environmental changes.98 Omic studies of astronaut
hair are thus beginning to emerge. Notably, a seminal study by
the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) conducted
transcriptomics on astronaut hair follicles collected before, dur-
ing, and after 6 months of spaceﬂight.99 Although several
markers of hair growth were unsurprisingly dysregulated during
ﬂight, interestingly, hair PCDH8 was derived as a potential
biomarker for astronaut neurochemical changes in the space
environment.99 Terrestrial studies of human hair also span other
omic lines (e.g., proteomics and metabolomics),100,101 high-
lighting the potential for multiomic proﬁling of astronaut hair
samples. Nevertheless, the extent to which various physiological
responses to spaceﬂight can be tracked by biomarkers in hair
warrants a better understanding, before the true scientiﬁc poten-
tial of hair omics toward biomonitoring astronaut health can be
established.
Breath
A ﬁnal sample type worthy of note when it comes to astronaut
omics collection is breath. Indeed, molecular analysis of exhaled
breath is rapidly emerging as a useful tool on Earth for bio-
monitoring of an individual in health and disease (‘‘breath-print’’),
both at the level of the lung as well as other vital organs via sys-
temic circulation (e.g., the heart).102,103 Exhaled breath analysis is
plausibly suited to the spaceﬂight environment, as samples can
be acquired frequently in a non-invasive manner, with relative
ease and at little expense.102 Moreover, for certain omic types,
such as proteomics, exhaled breath condensate may be better
suited for rapid analysis versus other forms of liquid biopsy,
such as blood and urine.104 Nevertheless, omic studies of astro-
naut breath remain very much in their infancy. In one of the only
studies to date,104 proteomic analysis of exhaled breath conden-
sate obtained from cosmonauts before and after long-term
spaceﬂight revealed strong enrichment for proteins involved in
keratinization and pathogenic E. coli infection, offering support
to the potential utility of breath analysis for non-invasive moni-
toring of astronaut health and respiratory tract pathology.104 On
Earth, metabolomic study of human exhaled air (‘‘breathomics’’)
has also proven to be highly feasible and consequently gained
great traction,105 though transcriptomic studies are currently
lacking, perhaps owing to poor knowledge of present mRNAs
due to high fragmentation of RNA isolated from exhaled breath
condensate.106 Nonetheless, sample collection advantages
coupled with multiomic potential106 make exhaled breath a highly
promising complementary source for molecular proﬁling of astro-
naut health, particularly with respect to the respiratory system.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR HUMAN
SPACE OMICS
In this section, the ethical challenges and legislative landscape
within Europe will be considered in the context of astronaut and
SFP-derived omics data. Focus is given to harmonious laws
across Europe, but it should be acknowledged that national
laws and the involvement of non-European law, via multinational
entities (e.g., commercial spaceﬂight companies) and inter-
national collaborations, can introduce further complexities. Ulti-
mately, legislation aims to ﬁnd a balance between supporting
scientiﬁc research and healthcare while protecting participants
fromharm; datashould be as open as possible inorder to facilitate
further analysis andas protected as necessary for the participants
donating data. We intend to summarize these ethical and legal
frameworks to encourage productive development of policies
pertaining to human space omics research, which could eventu-
ally cover biobanking and controlled utilization of omics data.
When are data personal?
In May 2018, the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679
(GDPR) came into force in the European Union. The regulation
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

aims to enhance individuals’ control over their data. The impact
of the GDPR on omics in healthcare and research has recently
been reviewed in a detailed report by the PHG Foundation.107
Article 3(1) of the GDPR states that ‘‘This Regulation applies to
the processing of personal data in the context of the activities of
an establishment of a controller or a processor in the Union,
regardless of whether the processing takes place in the Union or
not.’’ Therefore, a routine omics program for the ESA would
most likely fall within the territorial scope of the GDPR, but impor-
tantly this is only the case if the data are deemed to be per-
sonal data.
From the deﬁnition of personal data in Article 4(1) and Recital
26 of the GDPR, it would seem apparent that omics data could
be considered to be personal data if they are deemed reason-
ably likely to be either directly or indirectly identiﬁable. Hypo-
thetically, if a database contains solely omics with all other
identiﬁers removed, additional information would be needed
to indirectly identify the natural person from whom the data
are derived. This process is sometimes referred to as a linkage
attack.
Holding some similarity to rare disease cohorts,108–110 astro-
nauts and SFPs are currently a small population of public ﬁgures.
Consequently, information, including mission status, and pheno-
typic information, such as hair color, height, and sex, pertaining
to individuals are readily available to the public. It could, there-
fore, be possible to link astronauts’ or SFPs’ omic data to this
additional information in order to identify individuals.111 Howev-
er, an important caveat is that different omics data types have
different levels of identiﬁability when combined with phenotypic
information, meaning that some will qualify as personal data
while others do not.
Omics describing the unique DNA sequence of individuals,
such as SNPs, are generally regarded as having the highest
level of identiﬁability. Traits, including eye color, skin color,
and sex, are considered simple to accurately predict from
data sources, such as WGS.112 Thus, in the unique context
of spaceﬂight cohorts, such data types would likely be
classed as personal data. However, the identiﬁability of other
omics types, such as transcriptomics and proteomics, is also
an emerging area of research.113–116 Furthermore, the gener-
ation of multiomics datasets adds an additional layer of
complexity because there could be relationships between
the different omic types that increase the overall likelihood
of identiﬁcation.117 Additionally, raw data hold increased po-
tential for identiﬁcation compared with processed data, so
ﬁle formats are an important consideration for appropriate
data dissemination. Finally, aggregated data, which combine
datasets from a population of individuals (e.g., to produce
an average value), can reduce identiﬁability. However, aggre-
gated approaches can signiﬁcantly reduce utility for research
into
individual
differences
associated
with
spaceﬂight-
induced biological changes and, therefore, utility in personal-
ized medicine approaches.
It is also worth mentioning that the familial element of some
omic data types means that if it is deemed reasonably likely for
someone to identify a family member from the astronaut or
SFP’s personal omics data, then it would also be classiﬁed as
that family member’s personal data, so their rights may also be
brought into consideration.
Approval for data collection and processing
When it comes to navigating the ethics of conducting human
research studies in Europe, there are several prominent non-
legal binding instruments, including the Declaration of Helsinki,
which was ﬁrst formulated in 1964, with several subsequent re-
visions.118 These instruments have introduced key concepts
that have become encoded within national laws and regulations
across Europe. Two of the primary concepts are independent
ethical review committees and informed consent.
First, all research collecting omics data from human subjects
must gain approval from an independent ethical review commit-
tee before the research can commence. The committee consists
of a panel of experts, who provide oversight for human research,
ensuring that the research is conducted in agreement with inter-
nationally and locally accepted ethical guidelines and in compli-
ance with the law. In cases of data derived from ESA astronauts
ﬂying on missions with international collaborators, approval will
likely need to be granted by international ethics committees in
addition to European committees. For example, the Human
Research Multilateral Review Board (HRMRB) exists for over-
seeing human research on the ISS, with board members from
the international partners.
As part of addressing the ethical review committees, investi-
gators would be expected to demonstrate collection of
informed consent from all study participants. Prior to providing
such consent, participants should be clearly informed of the
research purpose, experimental and data handling procedures,
the potential risks, and their right to withdraw from the study at
any time. As mentioned in the previous section, utility of omics
is ever-increasing with the true capability and, by con-
sequence, identiﬁability, of omics yet to be unlocked. This
landscape of unknowns makes informed consent difﬁcult to
meaningfully deﬁne, particularly when research is not neces-
sarily hypothesis driven, as is the case with the longitudinal
omics collection program proposed in this article. In this
context, broad consent has emerged in law (e.g., GDPR Recital
33) and practice as a potential means of obtaining consent for
collecting omics for use in unspeciﬁed future research projects,
including biobanking.119 Notably, however, in the United
States, broad consent was used in the recent multiomics
proﬁling study onboard the commercial SpaceX Inspiration4
mission, to gain consent from the crew for the archiving and
future use of their samples and data for space health
research.22
In order for processing to be permitted, European space
omics data that are deemed to be personal data must satisfy a
legal basis pursuant to Article 6 of the GDPR. In the context of
space agencies or commercial companies, several of the rea-
sons enumerated in Article 6 could prove relevant. To para-
phrase, relevant bases may include (1) consent, (2) performance
of a contract, and (3) public interest. However, omics personal
data would also be considered special category data within
the GDPR, either under the classiﬁcation of genetic data or
data concerning health, in Article 4 and Recitals 34 and 35.120
Article 9 states that such data types cannot be processed unless
at least one of ten exceptions applies. To summarize, potentially
relevant exceptions include (1) explicit consent, (2) the data sub-
ject making their data public, (3) medical purposes, and (4)
archiving scientiﬁc data in the public interest. Ultimately, the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
9
Perspective

restrictions on processing imposed by Articles 6 and 9 of the
GDPR require careful consideration in the context of a space
agency or commercial company processing astronaut or SFP
personal omics data. There are many interesting angles to
consider based on space agencies’ multifaceted roles as
research institutions, government agencies, employers, and pri-
mary care providers for astronauts121 and the societal role of
spaceﬂight. To the latter point, the United Nations’ Outer Space
Treaty of 1967—considered to be the backbone of international
space law—states that astronauts should be regarded as
‘‘envoys of mankind.’’ The advent of commercial spaceﬂight
missions adds additional considerations, especially due to the
variety of mission types with varying degrees of scientiﬁc value.
Ethical issues pertaining to data usage
A key ethical challenge involved in omics research is the handling
of incidental ﬁndings in consideration of duty of care. Analysis of
astronaut or SFP-derived omics could reveal pertinent ﬁndings,
such as gene mutations associated with increased SANS risk;
however, incidental ﬁndings that are not necessarily relevant in
the spaceﬂight context, such as increased risk of late-onset Alz-
heimer’s disease, could also be unintentionally revealed.122 The
ethical dilemma lies in the decision of whether to inform the partic-
ipants, and indeed their family members, of these incidental
ﬁndings, which may not be medically actionable. Ultimately, the
protocol for handling incidental ﬁndings should be clearly deﬁned
when obtaining informed consent. Protocol could include giving
participants the choice to opt in or out of receiving these results
as well as developing appropriate support services when needed.
A further ethical challenge surrounding the processing and
usage of omics data is genetic discrimination, which is when
an individual receives differential treatment based on their ge-
netic information. In Europe, genetic discrimination is typically
addressed in national laws, which are inﬂuenced by regional in-
struments, including the 2000 Charter of Fundamental Rights of
the European Union and the 1997 Convention on Human Rights
and Biomedicine (also known as the Oviedo Convention).123
Chapter IV of the Oviedo Convention prohibits any form of
discrimination based on genetic heritage and also prohibits the
use of tests to predict genetic predisposition to diseases, unless
these tests are carried out for medical or scientiﬁc purposes,
together with the provision of adequate genetic counseling.
Thus, this would seem to permit the use of omics to study indi-
vidual susceptibility to spaceﬂight risks, such as radiation-
induced cancers, as long as genetic counseling is provided.
However, the potential role of omics-based susceptibility and
predisposition in processes, such as ﬂight assignment, nonethe-
less remains a contentious issue. In the United States, the 2008
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) prevents
NASA from making employment decisions, such as ﬂight a-
ssignment, based on genetic data.121,122 From a European
perspective, largely due to differences in national laws, the legal-
ity of using omics data in employment decisions, such as ﬂight
assignment, appears to be less clear. However, it seems likely
that in ﬂight assignment, the use of genomic susceptibility to
disease, as opposed to manifestation, would be viewed as
discriminatory. Additionally, ESA’s recent Parastronaut Feasi-
bility Project could be seen to suggest a more inclusive approach
to ﬂight assignment; thus, the focus of omics technologies
should probably be to reduce risk and improve health outcomes
via
personalized
medicine
approaches.25
However,
some
personalized medicine approaches are likely to be based on
the processing of omics data deemed to be personal data under
the GDPR. This could present a new challenge in operations with
international partners. For example, if other space agencies such
as NASA deploy personalized countermeasures but are unable
to process data from ESA astronauts in compliance with the
GDPR, either ESA astronauts will not be able to partake in the
use of these countermeasures to improve occupational health
or ESA will need to be able to deploy personalized countermea-
sure via an ESA program; personalized medicine approaches
have recently been considered by an ESA Topical Team.25 Simi-
larly, emergent challenges relating to GDPR compliance during
processing of personal data from Europeans on commercial
ﬂights need to be considered in the context of initiatives, such
as the database recently established by TRISH.22
Storing and sharing data
Because the ESA is an independent treaty organization based
in Europe, sharing omics data within ESA’s network is of great
importance. All 22 member states, associate members, and
countries with cooperation agreements, including Canada,
which sits on the Council, appear to follow the GDPR or are
considered, via adequacy decisions, secure third countries
due to similarities in data protection law. Thus, data can be
transferred between these countries, as long as all parties ﬁrst
reach a consensus on issues, such as the basis for lawful pro-
cessing and what constitutes personal data. While this sounds
simple, reaching a consensus can be challenging because the
GDPR allows scope for variation via national laws (e.g., Article
9), which may lead to key differences in interpretation and
application of the GDPR.124,125 Furthermore, space biology
research typically involves a great deal of international collabo-
ration with other space agencies, posing a need for interna-
tional sharing of data.
For astronaut and/or SFP omics data deemed not to be per-
sonal data, international sharing could be relatively simple. For
example, the data could potentially be uploaded to a publicly
accessible biobank, such as the NASA GeneLab data reposi-
tory.126 For context, NASA GeneLab has emerged as the primary
database for spaceﬂight omics data, with signiﬁcant European
representation in GeneLab’s Analysis Working Groups (AWGs)
and experimental datasets.127 However, if the data are deemed
to be personal data, transfers to countries without adequacy de-
cisions, including the United States, become challenging and
unclear at present due to the recent ‘‘Schrems II’’ judgment.128
Due to challenges with ensuring GDPR compliance during
global sharing of sensitive healthcare and research data, alterna-
tive models for data sharing have been considered. For example,
in congruence with a declaration signed by 21 European coun-
tries to transnationally share data on at least one million human
genomes by the end of 2022, large-scale initiatives, such as
the European Genome-Phenome Archive, are shifting toward
federated approaches.129 Federated approaches can invert the
traditional data-sharing paradigm of bringing the data to the
analysis by instead bringing the analysis to the data. Through
federated approaches, researchers can analyze data across a
distributed network of databases and then combine the results,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

potentially avoiding the transfer of personal data across jurisdic-
tions.130,131 This model can also be applied to the training of AI
models, in a process known as federated learning. For example,
a successful model for predicting dyspnea, a common side ef-
fect after radiotherapy treatment of lung cancer, was trained
on sensitive clinical data from several different hospitals across
Europe, without the data ever having to leave the individual hos-
pitals.132 Federated approaches could potentially serve as an
appropriate solution for enabling international access and anal-
ysis of sensitive astronaut and/or SFP healthcare or research
data, while ensuring international legal compliance. Other poten-
tial approaches to ease data sharing include data sanitization
methods, to convert identiﬁable data into non-identiﬁable for-
mats.133 However, methods that modify the data should be care-
fully balanced against the potential loss of scientiﬁc utility.
With the speciﬁc security issues of data-sharing strategies in
mind,130,134,135 data storage solutions, such as biobanks hous-
ing identiﬁable astronaut and/or SFP omics data, should meet
high standards of security, to prevent issues such as data
breaches. Chapter 4 of the GDPR requires that data controllers
approach ‘‘data protection by design’’ and establish safeguards
to protect the privacy and security of data in a manner that is pro-
portionate to the risks involved.
CONCLUSIONS
Humanity has laid ambitious plans to venture to Mars and estab-
lish settlements on other planetary bodies, and commercial
spaceﬂight is gaining rapid traction with the spacefaring popula-
tion set to quickly increase both in terms of size and diversity.
These new endeavors present new challenges for human health
in space. Crucially, more data are needed, especially for environ-
mental conditions beyond LEO, where biological and molecular
adaptations remain uncharted. Recently the ﬁrst multiomic
proﬁling studies of astronauts have been performed in the
NASA Twins and SpaceX Inspiration4 missions. With their feasi-
bility for spaceﬂight now demonstrated, these biological big data
approaches are primed to transform our understanding of health
in space, as they have for health on Earth. Importantly, in addition
to elucidating mechanistic understanding of spaceﬂight-induced
physiological deconditioning, these approaches also hold strong
potential to improve risk quantiﬁcation and occupational health
in space, such as through the design and deployment of person-
alized medicine approaches. Thus, routinely applying these
same approaches to European human subjects, including par-
ticipants in analog environments and astronauts and/or SFPs
in spaceﬂight missions, is a golden opportunity.
In order to achieve the full potential of these big data ap-
proaches, several challenges need to be addressed in a cohesive
European fashion. First, how do we best store and ensure
collected data are AI ready? Second, which datasets should we
collect and when? Third, how do we enable open science ap-
proaches while protecting personal data? Although we have intro-
duced the challenges and proposed some options, it is important
to achieve European consensus on these questions (Table 1). We
propose forming an ESA topical team and/or holding an ESA
workshop as a strategic way forward. The goal is to bring together
European human omics/data science researchers and human
subject researchers to address these questions in coordination
with ESA and stakeholders from the commercial spaceﬂight
sector. Importantly, this consensus will need to consider the inter-
national context of human research on the ISS, the commercial
aspects of data science, and the personal nature of the data.
These latter aspects could be achieved via collaboration with or-
ganizations, such as International Standards for Space Omics
Processing (ISSOP), HRMRB, and TRISH.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
H.C., R.H., J.B., D.B., S.G., T.E., and N.J.S. are members of the ESA Space
Omics Topical Team, funded by the ESA grant/contract 4000131202/20/NL/
PG/pt ‘‘Space Omics: Towards an integrated ESA/NASA –omics database
for spaceﬂight and ground facilities experiments’’ awarded to R.H., which
was the main funding source for this work. H.C. is also supported by the Ho-
rizon Center for Doctoral Training at the University of Nottingham (UKRI grant
no. EP/S023305/1). S.G. is supported by the Swedish Research Council VR
grant 2020-04864. L.A.R. and M.M. represent the Omics Subgroup of the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science KAKENHI funding group ‘‘Living
in Space’’ and are supported by JP15K21745, JP20H03234, and 20F20382.
L.A.R. is also supported by the JSPS postdoctoral fellowship P20382. We
thank Dr. Sarah Castro-Wallace, the NASA GeneLab Animal AWG, ISSOP,
ESA Space Omics Topical Team, ESA Personalized Medicine Topical Team,
and Global Alliance for Genomic Health (GA4GH) for useful discussions.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, H.C., L.A.R., S.G., T.E., and N.J.S.; investigation, H.C.,
C.R.G.W., M.J.M., T.E., N.J.S., and D.B.; writing – original draft, H.C. and
C.R.G.W.; writing – review & editing, all authors; visualization, H.C. and
M.J.M.; supervision, N.J.S., C.E.M., and M.M.; funding acquisition, R.H.,
H.C., S.G., L.A.R., and M.M.
Table 1. Goals and potential topics of discussion for suggested
ESA topical team/workshops
Goal: To to explore routine omics collection by deciding which omics
data to collect routinely, from which samples, and at which time
points.
Potential topics to be addressed
➔Which omic types and technologies have the highest potential for
scientiﬁc return and clinical actionability (with additional
consideration to multi-omic combinations)?
➔Which sample types are the most practical to collect (i.e., cost,
sample processing procedures, and invasiveness)?
➔What metadata would be the most useful and practical to
standardize alongside omics collection (e.g., physiological,
environmental, and lifestyle)?
➔At which time points should omics be collected?
➔How can the AI readiness of the generated datasets be maximized?
Goal: To help establish clear ESA policy on human omics research
governance
Potential topics to be addressed
➔What is the potential identiﬁably of different omic types, in the
speciﬁc context of astronauts?
➔How should ESA go about obtaining meaningful informed consent
for omics research?
➔Which legal bases should be used for processing astronaut and/or
SFP omics data?
➔How should ESA handle potential ethical issues, such as incidental
ﬁndings and discrimination?
➔How should data storage and data sharing between ESA’s
European and international network be handled?
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
11
Perspective

DECLARATIONS OF INTERESTS
D.B. is the CSO at yuri GmbH and co-founder of Poppy Health. M.M. is an
employee of LSI Medience Corporation through the cross-appointment sys-
tem of University of Tsukuba and a research advisor of Robotic Biology Insti-
tute. C.E.M. is a co-founder of Biotia and Onegevity Health.
REFERENCES
1. Griko, Y.V., Loftus, D.J., Stolc, V., and Peletskaya, E. (2022). Private
spaceﬂight: a new landscape for dealing with medical risk. Life Sci.
Space Res. 33, 41–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lssr.2022.03.001.
2. Afshinnekoo, E., Scott, R.T., MacKay, M.J., Pariset, E., Cekanaviciute,
E., Barker, R., Gilroy, S., Hassane, D., Smith, S.M., Zwart, S.R., et al.
(2020). Fundamental biological features of spaceﬂight: advancing the
ﬁeld to enable deep-space exploration. Cell 183, 1162–1184. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.050.
3. Rittweger, J., Albracht, K., Fl€uck, M., Ruoss, S., Brocca, L., Longa, E.,
Moriggi, M., Seynnes, O., Di Giulio, I., Tenori, L., et al. (2018). Sarcolab
pilot study into skeletal muscle’s adaptation to long-term spaceﬂight.
NPJ Microgravity 4, 18. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-018-0052-1.
4. Gabel, L., Liphardt, A.M., Hulme, P.A., Heer, M., Zwart, S.R., Sibonga,
J.D., Smith, S.M., and Boyd, S.K. (2022). Pre-ﬂight exercise and bone
metabolism predict unloading-induced bone loss due to spaceﬂight.
Br. J. Sports Med. 56, 196–203. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2020-
103602.
5. Lee, A.G., Mader, T.H., Gibson, C.R., and Tarver, W. (2017). Space ﬂight-
associated neuro-ocular syndrome. JAMA Ophthalmol. 135, 992. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2017.2396.
6. Stepanek, J., Blue, R.S., and Parazynski, S. (2019). Space medicine in
the era of civilian spaceﬂight. N. Engl. J. Med. 380, 1053–1060. https://
doi.org/10.1056/nejmra1609012.
7. Rutter, L., Barker, R., Bezdan, D., Cope, H., Costes, S.V., Degoricija, L.,
Fisch, K.M., Gabitto, M.I., Gebre, S., Giacomello, S., et al. (2020). A new
era for space life science: international standards for space omics pro-
cessing. Patterns 1, 100148.
8. Van Ombergen, A., Rossiter, A., and Ngo-Anh, T.J. (2021). ‘‘White Mars’’
- nearly two decades of biomedical research at the Antarctic Concordia
station. Exp. Physiol. 106, 6–17. https://doi.org/10.1113/ep088352.
9. Stokes, M., Evetts, S., Rittweger, J., Weber, T., Caplan, N., Danneels, L.,
Hides, J., Kuipers, A., Lambrecht, G., Peterson, N., et al. (2016). Recom-
mendations for Future Post-mission Neuro-Musculoskeletal Recondi-
tioning Research and Practice Post-mission Exercise (Reconditioning)
Topical Team Report (European Space Agency).
10. Zhang, S., Wimmer-Schweingruber, R.F., Yu, J., Wang, C., Fu, Q., Zou,
Y., Sun, Y., Wang, C., Hou, D., Bo¨ ttcher, S.I., et al. (2020). First measure-
ments of the radiation dose on the lunar surface. Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz1334.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz1334.
11. Zeitlin, C., Hassler, D.M., Cucinotta, F.A., Ehresmann, B., Wimmer-
Schweingruber, R.F., Brinza, D.E., Kang, S., Weigle, G., Bo¨ ttcher, S.,
Bo¨ hm, E., et al. (2013). Measurements of Energetic Particle Radiation
in Transit to Mars on the Mars Science Laboratory. Science 340.
12. Restier-Verlet, J., El-Nachef, L., Ferlazzo, M.L., Al-Choboq, J., Gran-
zotto, A., Bouchet, A., and Foray, N. (2021). Radiation on earth or in
space: what does it change? Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 3739. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms22073739.
13. Simonsen, L.C., Slaba, T.C., Guida, P., and Rusek, A. (2020). NASA’s ﬁrst
ground-based Galactic Cosmic Ray Simulator: enabling a new era in
space radiobiology research. PLoS Biol. 18, e3000669. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pbio.3000669.
14. Walsh, L., Hafner, L., Straube, U., Ulanowski, A., Fogtman, A., Durante,
M., Weerts, G., and Schneider, U. (2021). A bespoke health risk assess-
ment methodology for the radiation protection of astronauts. Radiat. En-
viron.
Biophys.
60,
213–231.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00411-021-
00910-0.
15. Linnarsson, D., Carpenter, J., Fubini, B., Gerde, P., Karlsson, L.L., Loftus,
D.J., Prisk, G.K., Staufer, U., Tranﬁeld, E.M., and van Westrenen, W.
(2012). Toxicity of lunar dust. Planet. Space Sci. 74, 57–71. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pss.2012.05.023.
16. Petersen, N., Lambrecht, G., Scott, J., Hirsch, N., Stokes, M., and Mes-
ter, J. (2017). Postﬂight reconditioning for European Astronauts - a case
report of recovery after six months in space. Musculoskelet. Sci. Pract.
27 (Suppl 1), S23–S31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msksp.2016.12.010.
17. Schmidt, M.A., and Goodwin, T.J. (2013). Personalized medicine in hu-
man space ﬂight: using Omics based analyses to develop individualized
countermeasures that enhance astronaut safety and performance. Me-
tabolomics 9, 1134–1156. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-013-0556-3.
18. Hasin, Y., Seldin, M., and Lusis, A. (2017). Multi-omics approaches to
disease. Genome Biol. 18, 83. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-017-
1215-1.
19. Willis, C.R.G., Gallagher, I.J., Wilkinson, D.J., Brook, M.S., Bass, J.J.,
Phillips, B.E., Smith, K., Etheridge, T., Stokes, T., McGlory, C., et al.
(2021). Transcriptomic links to muscle mass loss and declines in cumu-
lative muscle protein synthesis during short-term disuse in healthy
younger humans. FASEB. J. 35, e21830. https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.
202100276rr.
20. Kousathanas, A., Pairo-Castineira, E., Rawlik, K., Stuckey, A., Odhams,
C.A., Walker, S., Russell, C.D., Malinauskas, T., Wu, Y., Millar, J.,
Shen, X., Elliott, K.S., Grifﬁths, F., Oosthuyzen, W., Morrice, K., Keating,
S., Wang, B., Rhodes, D., Klaric, L., Zechner, M., Parkinson, N., Siddiq,
A., Goddard, P., Donovan, S., Maslove, D., Nichol, A., Semple, M.G.,
Zainy, T., Maleady-Crowe, F., Todd, L., Salehi, S., Knight, J., Elgar, G.,
Chan, G., Arumugam, P., Patch, C., Rendon, A., Bentley, D., Kingsley,
C., Kosmicki, J.A., Horowitz, J.E., Baras, A., Abecasis, G.R., Ferreira,
M.A.R., Justice, A., Mirshahi, T., Oetjens, M., Rader, D.J., Ritchie,
M.D., Verma, A., Fowler, T.A., Shankar-Hari, M., Summers, C., Hinds,
C., Horby, P., Ling, L., McAuley, D., Montgomery, H., Openshaw,
P.J.M., Elliott, P., Walsh, T., Tenesa, A., GenOMICC Investigators;
23andMe; Covid-19 Human Genetics Initiative, Fawkes, A., Murphy, L.,
Rowan, K., Ponting, C.P., Vitart, V., Wilson, J.F., Yang, J., Bretherick,
A.D., Scott, R.H., Hendry, S.C., Moutsianas, L., Law, A., Caulﬁeld,
M.J., and Baillie, J.K. (2022). Whole genome sequencing reveals host
factors underlying critical Covid-19. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-022-04576-6.
21. Garrett-Bakelman, F.E., Darshi, M., Green, S.J., Gur, R.C., Lin, L., Ma-
cias, B.R., McKenna, M.J., Meydan, C., Mishra, T., Nasrini, J., et al.
(2019). The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis of a year-
long human spaceﬂight. Science 364, eaau8650. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aau8650.
22. Urquieta, E., Wu, J., Hury, J., and Donoviel, D. (2022). Establishment of
an open biomedical database for commercial spaceﬂight. Nat. Med.
28, 611–612.
23. Deane, C.S., Borg, J., Cahill, T., Carnero-Diaz, E., Etheridge, T., Hardi-
man, G., Leys, N., Madrigal, P., Manzano, A., Mastroleo, F., et al.
(2022). Space omics research in Europe: contributions, geographical dis-
tribution and ESA member state funding schemes. iScience 25, 103920.
24. Zwart, S.R., Gregory, J.F., Zeisel, S.H., Gibson, C.R., Mader, T.H., Kin-
chen, J.M., Ueland, P.M., Ploutz-Snyder, R., Heer, M.A., and Smith,
S.M. (2016). Genotype, B-vitamin status, and androgens affect space-
ﬂight-induced ophthalmic changes. FASEB. J. 30, 141–148. https://doi.
org/10.1096/fj.15-278457.
25. Pavez Lorie` , E., Baatout, S., Chouke´ r, A., Chouke´ r, A., Buchheim, J.I.,
Baselet, B., Dello Russo, C., Wotring, V., Monici, M., Morbidelli, L.,
et al. (2021). The future of personalized medicine in space: from observa-
tions to countermeasures. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 9, 739747. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2021.739747.
26. Lulli, M., Cialdai, F., Vignali, L., Monici, M., Luzzi, S., Cicconi, A., Cac-
chione, S., Magi, A., Balsamo, M., Vukich, M., et al. (2018). The Coen-
zyme Q10 as an antiapoptotic countermeasure for retinal lesions on-
board the International Space Station. Front. Physiol. 9. https://doi.org/
10.3389/conf.fphys.2018.26.00036.
27. Stingl, J.C., Welker, S., Hartmann, G., Damann, V., and Gerzer, R. (2015).
Where failure is not an option -personalized medicine in astronauts. PLoS
One 10, e0140764. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0140764.
28. Sawyers, L., Anderson, C., Boyd, M.J., Hessel, V., Wotring, V., Williams,
P.M., et al. (2022). Astropharmacy: pushing the boundaries of the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

pharmacists’ role for sustainable space exploration. Res. Soc. Adm.
Pharm. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sapharm.2022.02.002.
29. Strangman, G.E., Sawyer, A., Fabre, K.M., Urquieta, E., Hury, J., III, Do-
noviel, D., Wu, J., Peterman, A., Hoffman, J., and Donoviel, D. (2019).
Deep-space applications for point-of-care technologies. Curr. Opin. Bio-
med. Eng. 11, 45–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobme.2019.08.014.
30. Lee, I.-M., Shiroma, E.J., Lobelo, F., Puska, P., Blair, S.N., and Katzmar-
zyk, P.T.; Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group (2012). Effect of
physical inactivity on major non-communicable diseases worldwide: an
analysis of burden of disease and life expectancy. Lancet 380,
219–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(12)61031-9.
31. Scott, R.T., Grigorev, K., Mackintosh, G., Gebre, S.G., Mason, C.E., Del
Alto, M.E., and Costes, S.V. (2020). Advancing the integration of biosci-
ences data sharing to further enable space exploration. Cell Rep. 33,
108441. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108441.
32. Wilkinson, M.D., Dumontier, M., Aalbersberg, I.J.J., Appleton, G., Axton,
M., Baak, A., Blomberg, N., Boiten, J.-W., da Silva Santos, L.B., Bourne,
P.E., et al. (2016). The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientiﬁc data manage-
ment and stewardship. Sci. Data 3, 160018. https://doi.org/10.1038/
sdata.2016.18.
33. Jacobsen, A., de Miranda Azevedo, R., Juty, N., Batista, D., Coles, S.,
Cornet, R., Courtot, M., Crosas, M., Dumontier, M., Evelo, C.T., et al.
(2020). FAIR principles: interpretations and implementation consider-
ations. Data Intell. 2, 10–29. https://doi.org/10.1162/dint_r_00024.
34. Overbey, E.G., Saravia-Butler, A.M., Zhang, Z., Rathi, K.S., Fogle, H., da
Silveira, W.A., Barker, R.J., Bass, J.J., Beheshti, A., Berrios, D.C., et al.
(2021). NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline: standardized pro-
cessing of short-read RNA-seq data. iScience 24, 102361. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102361.
35. Bohr, A., and Memarzadeh, K. (2020). Chapter 2 - the rise of artiﬁcial in-
telligence in healthcare applications. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Health-
care, A. Bohr and K. Memarzadeh, eds. (Academic Press), pp. 25–60.
36. Bjo¨ rnsson, B., Borrebaeck, C., Elander, N., Gasslander, T., Gawel, D.R.,
Gustafsson, M., Jo¨ rnsten, R., Lee, E.J., Li, X., Lilja, S., et al. (2019). Digital
twins to personalize medicine. Genome Med. 12, 4. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s13073-019-0701-3.
37. Scott, R.T., Antonsen, E.L., Sanders, L.M., Hastings, J.J.A., Park, S.-M.,
Mackintosh, G., Reynolds, R.J., Hoarfrost, A.L., Sawyer, A., Greene,
C.S., et al. (2021). Beyond low earth orbit: biomonitoring, artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, and precision space health. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2112.12554.
38. Cohain, A., Divaraniya, A.A., Zhu, K., Scarpa, J.R., Kasarskis, A., Zhu, J.,
Chang, R., Dudley, J.T., and Schadt, E.E. (2017). Exploring the reproduc-
ibility of probabilistic causal molecular network models. Pac. Symp. Bio-
comput. 22, 120–131. https://doi.org/10.1142/9789813207813_0013.
39. Mostavi, M., Chiu, Y.-C., Chen, Y., and Huang, Y. (2021). CancerSiam-
ese: one-shot learning for predicting primary and metastatic tumor types
unseen during model training. BMC Bioinf. 22, 244. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s12859-021-04157-w.
40. Ma, J., Fong, S.H., Luo, Y., Bakkenist, C.J., Shen, J.P., Mourragui, S.,
Wessels, L.F.A., Hafner, M., Sharan, R., Peng, J., and Ideker, T. (2021).
Few-shot learning creates predictive models of drug response that trans-
late from high-throughput screens to individual patients. Nat. Can. (Que.)
2, 233–244. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-020-00169-2.
41. da Silveira, W.A., Fazelinia, H., Rosenthal, S.B., Laiakis, E.C., Kim, M.S.,
Meydan, C., Kidane, Y., Rathi, K.S., Smith, S.M., Stear, B., et al. (2020).
Comprehensive multi-omics analysis reveals mitochondrial stress as a
central biological hub for spaceﬂight impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201.e20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.002.
42. Pulley, J.M., Rhoads, J.P., Jerome, R.N., Challa, A.P., Erreger, K.B., Joly,
M.M., Lavieri, R.R., Perry, K.E., Zaleski, N.M., Shirey-Rice, J.K., and
Aronoff, D.M. (2020). Using what we already have: uncovering new
drug repurposing strategies in existing omics data. Annu. Rev. Pharma-
col. Toxicol. 60, 333–352. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-
010919-023537.
43. Stark, Z., Dolman, L., Manolio, T.A., Ozenberger, B., Hill, S.L., Caulﬁed,
M.J., Levy, Y., Glazer, D., Wilson, J., Lawler, M., et al. (2019). Integrating
genomics into healthcare: a global responsibility. Am. J. Hum. Genet.
104, 13–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.11.014.
44. Matey, E.T., Ragan, A.K., Oyen, L.J., Vitek, C.R., Aoudia, S.L., Ragab,
A.K., Fee-Schroeder, K.C., Black, J.L., Moyer, A.M., Nicholson, W.T.,
et al. (2022). Nine-gene pharmacogenomics proﬁle service: the Mayo
Clinic experience. Pharmacogenomics J. 22, 69–74. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41397-021-00258-0.
45. Voorhies, A.A., Mark Ott, C., Mehta, S., Pierson, D.L., Crucian, B.E., Fei-
veson, A., Oubre, C.M., Torralba, M., Moncera, K., Zhang, Y., et al.
(2019). Study of the impact of long-duration space missions at the Inter-
national Space Station on the astronaut microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 9911.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-46303-8.
46. Urbaniak, C., Lorenzi, H., Thissen, J., Jaing, C., Crucian, B., Sams, C.,
Pierson, D., Venkateswaran, K., and Mehta, S. (2020). The inﬂuence of
spaceﬂight on the astronaut salivary microbiome and the search for a mi-
crobiome biomarker for viral reactivation. Microbiome 8, 56. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40168-020-00830-z.
47. Stahl-Rommel, S., Jain, M., Nguyen, H.N., Arnold, R.R., Aunon-Chan-
cellor, S.M., Sharp, G.M., Castro, C.L., John, K.K., Juul, S., Turner,
D.J., et al. (2021). Real-time culture-independent microbial proﬁling on-
board the international space station using Nanopore sequencing. Genes
12, 106. https://doi.org/10.3390/genes12010106.
48. Avila-Herrera, A., Thissen, J., Urbaniak, C., Be, N.A., Smith, D.J., Kar-
ouia, F., Mehta, S., Venkateswaran, K., and Jaing, C. (2020). Crewmem-
ber microbiome may inﬂuence microbial composition of ISS habitable
surfaces. PLoS One 15, e0231838. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0231838.
49. Yu, C.T., Chao, B.N., Barajas, R., Haznadar, M., Maruvada, P., Nicastro,
H.L., Ross, S.A., Verma, M., Rogers, S., and Zanetti, K.A. (2022). An
evaluation of the National Institutes of Health grants portfolio: identifying
opportunities and challenges for multi-omics research that leverage
metabolomics data. Metabolomics 18, 29. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11306-022-01878-8.
50. Mencia-Trinchant, N., MacKay, M.J., Chin, C., Afshinnekoo, E., Foox, J.,
Meydan, C., Butler, D., Mozsary, C., Vernice, N.A., Darby, C., et al.
(2021). Clonal hematopoiesis before, during, and after human space-
ﬂight. Cell Rep. 34, 108740. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.
108740.
51. Trudel, G., Shahin, N., Ramsay, T., Laneuville, O., and Louati, H. (2022).
Hemolysis contributes to anemia during long-duration space ﬂight. Nat.
Med. 28, 59–62. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01637-7.
52. Mias, G.I., Singh, V.V., Rogers, L.R.K., Xue, S., Zheng, M., Domanskyi,
S., Kanada, M., Piermarocchi, C., and He, J. (2021). Longitudinal saliva
omics responses to immune perturbation: a case study. Sci. Rep. 11,
710. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-80605-6.
53. Roda, A., Mirasoli, M., Guardigli, M., Zangheri, M., Caliceti, C., Calabria,
D., and Simoni, P. (2018). Advanced biosensors for monitoring astro-
nauts’ health during long-duration space missions. Biosens. Bioelectron.
111, 18–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2018.03.062.
54. Castro-Wallace, S.L., Chiu, C.Y., John, K.K., Stahl, S.E., Rubins, K.H.,
McIntyre, A.B.R., Dworkin, J.P., Lupisella, M.L., Smith, D.J., Botkin,
D.J., et al. (2017). Nanopore DNA sequencing and genome assembly
on the international space station. Sci. Rep. 7, 18022. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-017-18364-0.
55. Burton, A.S., Stahl, S.E., John, K.K., Jain, M., Juul, S., Turner, D.J., Har-
rington, E.D., Stoddart, D., Paten, B., Akeson, M., and Castro-Wallace,
S.L. (2020). Off earth identiﬁcation of bacterial populations using 16S
rDNA Nanopore sequencing. Genes 11, 76. https://doi.org/10.3390/
genes11010076.
56. Sanders, L.M., Yang, J.H., Scott, R.T., Qutub, A.A., Martin, H.G., Berrios,
D.C., Hastings, J.J.A., Rask, J., Mackintosh, G., Hoarfrost, A.L., et al.
(2021). Beyond low earth orbit: biological research, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and self-driving labs. Preprint at arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2112.12582.
57. Wnorowski, A., Sharma, A., Chen, H., Wu, H., Shao, N.-Y., Sayed, N., Liu,
C., Countryman, S., Stodieck, L.S., Rubins, K.H., et al. (2019). Effects of
spaceﬂight
on
human
induced
pluripotent
stem
cell-derived
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
13
Perspective

cardiomyocyte structure and function. Stem Cell Rep. 13, 960–969.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2019.10.006.
58. Barrila, J., Sarker, S.F., Hansmeier, N., Yang, S., Buss, K., Briones, N.,
Park, J., Davis, R.R., Forsyth, R.J., Ott, C.M., et al. (2021). Evaluating
the effect of spaceﬂight on the host-pathogen interaction between hu-
man intestinal epithelial cells and Salmonella Typhimurium. NPJ Micro-
gravity 7, 9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-021-00136-w.
59. Trappe, S., Costill, D., Gallagher, P., Creer, A., Peters, J.R., Evans, H.,
Riley, D.A., and Fitts, R.H. (2009). Exercise in space: human skeletal mus-
cle after 6 months aboard the International Space Station. J. Appl. Phys-
iol. 106, 1159–1168. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.91578.2008.
60. Fitts, R.H., Trappe, S.W., Costill, D.L., Gallagher, P.M., Creer, A.C., Col-
loton, P.A., Peters, J.R., Romatowski, J.G., Bain, J.L., and Riley, D.A.
(2010). Prolonged space ﬂight-induced alterations in the structure and
function of human skeletal muscle ﬁbres. J. Physiol. 588, 3567–3592.
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2010.188508.
61. Fitts, R.H., Colloton, P.A., Trappe, S.W., Costill, D.L., Bain, J.L.W., and
Riley, D.A. (2013). Effects of prolonged space ﬂight on human skeletal
muscle enzyme and substrate proﬁles. J. Appl. Physiol. 115, 667–679.
https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00489.2013.
62. Corvelyn, M., De Beukelaer, N., Duelen, R., Deschrevel, J., Van Cam-
penhout, A., Prinsen, S., Gayan-Ramirez, G., Maes, K., Weide, G., De-
sloovere, K., et al. (2020). Muscle microbiopsy to delineate stem cell
involvement in young patients: a novel approach for children with cere-
bral palsy. Front. Physiol.
11, 945. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.
2020.00945.
63. Berekme´ ri, A., Tiganescu, A., Alase, A.A., Vital, E., Stacey, M., and
Wittmann, M. (2019). Non-invasive approaches for the diagnosis of auto-
immune/autoinﬂammatory skin diseases-A focus on psoriasis and lupus
erythematosus. Front. Immunol. 10, 1931. https://doi.org/10.3389/
ﬁmmu.2019.01931.
64. Crucian, B., Stowe, R., Mehta, S., Uchakin, P., Quiriarte, H., Pierson, D.,
and Sams, C. (2013). Immune system dysregulation occurs during short
duration spaceﬂight on board the space shuttle. J. Clin. Immunol. 33,
456–465. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-012-9824-7.
65. Crucian, B., Stowe, R.P., Mehta, S., Quiriarte, H., Pierson, D., and Sams,
C. (2015). Alterations in adaptive immunity persist during long-duration
spaceﬂight.
NPJ
Microgravity
1,
15013.
https://doi.org/10.1038/
npjmgrav.2015.13.
66. Crucian, B.E., Zwart, S.R., Mehta, S., Uchakin, P., Quiriarte, H.D., Pier-
son, D., Sams, C.F., and Smith, S.M. (2014). Plasma cytokine concentra-
tions indicate that in vivo hormonal regulation of immunity is altered
during long-duration spaceﬂight. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 34,
778–786. https://doi.org/10.1089/jir.2013.0129.
67. Buchheim, J.-I., Ghislin, S., Ouzren, N., Albuisson, E., Vanet, A., Matzel,
S., Ponomarev, S., Rykova, M., Chouke´ r, A., Chouke´ r, A., and Frippiat,
J.-P. (2020). Plasticity of the human IgM repertoire in response to long-
term spaceﬂight. FASEB. J. 34, 16144–16162. https://doi.org/10.1096/
fj.202001403rr.
68. Bezdan, D., Grigorev, K., Meydan, C., Pelissier Vatter, F.A., Ciofﬁ, M.,
Rao, V., MacKay, M., Nakahira, K., Burnham, P., Afshinnekoo, E., et al.
(2020). Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and exosome proﬁling from a year-long hu-
man spaceﬂight reveals circulating biomarkers. iScience 23, 101844.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2020.101844.
69. Malkani, S., Chin, C.R., Cekanaviciute, E., Mortreux, M., Okinula, H.,
Tarbier, M., Schreurs, A.-S., Shirazi-Fard, Y., Tahimic, C.G.T., Rodriguez,
D.N., et al. (2020). Circulating miRNA spaceﬂight signature reveals tar-
gets for countermeasure development. Cell Rep. 33, 108448. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108448.
70. Brzhozovskiy, A.G., Kononikhin, A.S., Pastushkova, L.C., Kashirina,
D.N., Indeykina, M.I., Popov, I.A., Custaud, M.-A., Larina, I.M., and Niko-
laev, E.N. (2019). The effects of spaceﬂight factors on the human plasma
proteome, including both real space missions and ground-based exper-
iments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 3194. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20133194.
71. Pastushkova, L.K., Rusanov, V.B., Goncharova, A.G., Nosovskiy, A.M.,
Luchitskaya, E.S., Kashirina, D.N., Kononikhin, A.S., Kussmaul, A.R., Ya-
khya, Y.D., Larina, I.M., and Nikolaev, E.N. (2021). Blood plasma proteins
associated with heart rate variability in cosmonauts who have completed
long-duration space missions. Front. Physiol. 12, 760875. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fphys.2021.760875.
72. Brzhozovskiy, A., Kononikhin, A., Indeykina, M., Pastushkova, L., Popov,
I.A., Nikolaev, E.N., Larina, I.M., Brzhozovskiy, A., and Kononikhin, A.
(2017). Label-free study of cosmonaut’s urinary proteome changes after
long-duration spaceﬂights. Eur. J. Mass Spectrom. 23, 225–229. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1469066717717610.
73. Kuo, T.-R., and Chen, C.-H. (2017). Bone biomarker for the clinical
assessment of osteoporosis: recent developments and future perspec-
tives. Biomark Res 5, 18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40364-017-0097-4.
74. Swensen, A.C., He, J., Fang, A.C., Ye, Y., Nicora, C.D., Shi, T., Liu, A.Y.,
Sigdel, T.K., Sarwal, M.M., and Qian, W.-J. (2021). A comprehensive
urine proteome database generated from patients with various renal con-
ditions and prostate cancer. Front. Med. 8, 548212. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmed.2021.548212.
75. Jing, J., and Gao, Y. (2018). Urine biomarkers in the early stages of dis-
eases: current status and perspective. Discov. Med. 25, 57–65.
76. Gao, Y. (2015). Urine is a better biomarker source than blood especially
for kidney diseases. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 845, 3–12. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-94-017-9523-4_1.
77. Pastushkova, L.H., Rusanov, V.B., Goncharova, A.G., Brzhozovskiy,
A.G., Kononikhin, A.S., Chernikova, A.G., Kashirina, D.N., Nosovsky,
A.M., Baevsky, R.M., Nikolaev, E.N., and Larina, I.M. (2019). Urine prote-
ome changes associated with autonomic regulation of heart rate in cos-
monauts. BMC Syst. Biol. 13, 17. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12918-019-
0688-9.
78. Pastushkova, L.K., Kashirina, D.N., Brzhozovskiy, A.G., Kononikhin,
A.S., Tiys, E.S., Ivanisenko, V.A., Koloteva, M.I., Nikolaev, E.N., and Lar-
ina, I.M. (2019). Evaluation of cardiovascular system state by urine prote-
ome after manned space ﬂight. Acta Astronaut. 160, 594–600. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2019.02.015.
79. Kinross, J.M., Darzi, A.W., and Nicholson, J.K. (2011). Gut microbiome-
host interactions in health and disease. Genome Med. 3, 14. https://
doi.org/10.1186/gm228.
80. Valdes, A.M., Walter, J., Segal, E., and Spector, T.D. (2018). Role of the
gut microbiota in nutrition and health. BMJ 361, k2179. https://doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.k2179.
81. Tang, Q., Jin, G., Wang, G., Liu, T., Liu, X., Wang, B., and Cao, H. (2020).
Current sampling methods for gut microbiota: a call for more precise de-
vices. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10, 151. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fcimb.2020.00151.
82. Turroni, S., Magnani, M., Kc, P., Lesnik, P., Vidal, H., and Heer, M. (2020).
Gut microbiome and space travelers’ health: state of the art and possible
pro/prebiotic strategies for long-term space missions. Front. Physiol. 11,
553929. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.553929.
83. Liu, Z., Luo, G., Du, R., Sun, W., Li, J., Lan, H., Chen, P., Yuan, X., Cao, D.,
Li, Y., et al. (2020). Effects of spaceﬂight on the composition and function
of the human gut microbiota. Gut Microb. 11, 807–819. https://doi.org/
10.1080/19490976.2019.1710091.
84. Danko, D.C., Singh, N., Butler, D.J., Mozsary, C., Jiang, P., Keshavar-
zian, A., Maienschein-Cline, M., Chlipala, G., Afshinnekoo, E., Bezdan,
D., et al. (2020). Genetic and immunological evidence for microbial trans-
fer between the international space station and an astronaut. Preprint at
bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.376954.
85. Zierer, J., Jackson, M.A., Kastenm€uller, G., Mangino, M., Long, T., Tele-
nti, A., Mohney, R.P., Small, K.S., Bell, J.T., Steves, C.J., et al. (2018). The
fecal metabolome as a functional readout of the gut microbiome. Nat.
Genet. 50, 790–795. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-018-0135-7.
86. Ursell, L.K., Metcalf, J.L., Parfrey, L.W., and Knight, R. (2012). Deﬁning
the human microbiome. Nutr. Rev. 70 (Suppl 1), S38–S44.
87. Blum, H.E. (2017). The human microbiome. Adv. Med. Sci. 62, 414–420.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advms.2017.04.005.
88. Gilbert, J.A., Blaser, M.J., Caporaso, J.G., Jansson, J.K., Lynch, S.V.,
and Knight, R. (2018). Current understanding of the human microbiome.
Nat. Med. 24, 392–400. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4517.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective

89. Salvucci, E. (2019). The human-microbiome superorganism and its mod-
ulation to restore health. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 70, 781–795. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09637486.2019.1580682.
90. Fan, Y., and Pedersen, O. (2021). Gut microbiota in human metabolic
health and disease. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19, 55–71. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41579-020-0433-9.
91. Be, N.A., Avila-Herrera, A., Allen, J.E., Singh, N., Checinska Sielaff, A.,
Jaing, C., and Venkateswaran, K. (2017). Whole metagenome proﬁles
of particulates collected from the International Space Station. Micro-
biome 5, 81. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-017-0292-4.
92. Singh, N.K., Wood, J.M., Karouia, F., and Venkateswaran, K. (2018). Suc-
cession and persistence of microbial communities and antimicrobial
resistance genes associated with International Space Station environ-
mental surfaces. Microbiome 6, 204. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-
018-0585-2.
93. Checinska Sielaff, A., Urbaniak, C., Mohan, G.B.M., Stepanov, V.G.,
Tran, Q., Wood, J.M., Minich, J., McDonald, D., Mayer, T., Knight, R.,
et al. (2019). Characterization of the total and viable bacterial and fungal
communities associated with the International Space Station surfaces.
Microbiome 7, 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0666-x.
94. Stabler, R.A., Rosado, H., Doyle, R., Negus, D., Carvil, P.A., Kristja´ nsson,
J.G., Green, D.A., Franco-Cendejas, R., Davies, C., Mogensen, A., et al.
(2017). Impact of the mk VI SkinSuit on skin microbiota of terrestrial vol-
unteers and an international space station-bound astronaut. NPJ Micro-
gravity 3, 23. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-017-0029-5.
95. Morrison, M.D., Thissen, J.B., Karouia, F., Mehta, S., Urbaniak, C., Ven-
kateswaran, K., Smith, D.J., and Jaing, C. (2021). Investigation of space-
ﬂight induced changes to astronaut microbiomes. Front. Microbiol. 12,
659179. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.659179.
96. Lee, M.D., O’Rourke, A., Lorenzi, H., Bebout, B.M., Dupont, C.L., and
Everroad,
R.C.
(2021).
Reference-guided
metagenomics
reveals
genome-level evidence of potential microbial transmission from the ISS
environment to an astronaut’s microbiome. iScience 24, 102114.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102114.
97. Salama, S.A., Serrana, M., Au, W.W., and Au, W.W. (1999). Biomonitoring
using accessible human cells for exposure and health risk assessment.
Mutat.
Res.
436,
99–112.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1383-5742(98)
00021-0.
98. Terada, M., Seki, M., Higashibata, A., Yamada, S., Takahashi, R., Ma-
jima, H.J., Yamazaki, T., Watanabe-Asaka, T., Niihori, M., Mukai, C.,
and Ishioka, N. (2013). Genetic analysis of the human hair roots as a
tool for spaceﬂight experiments. Adv. Biosci. Biotechnol. 04, 75–88.
https://doi.org/10.4236/abb.2013.410a3009.
99. Terada, M., Seki, M., Takahashi, R., Yamada, S., Higashibata, A., Ma-
jima, H.J., Sudoh, M., Mukai, C., and Ishioka, N. (2016). Effects of a
closed space environment on gene expression in hair follicles of astro-
nauts in the international space station. PLoS One 11, e0150801.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0150801.
100. Adav, S.S., Subbaiaih, R.S., Kerk, S.K., Lee, A.Y., Lai, H.Y., Ng, K.W.,
Sze, S.K., and Schmidtchen, A. (2018). Studies on the proteome of hu-
man hair - identiﬁcation of histones and deamidated keratins. Sci. Rep.
8, 1599. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20041-9.
101. Chen, Y., Guo, J., Xing, S., Yu, H., and Huan, T. (2021). Global-scale me-
tabolomic proﬁling of human hair for simultaneous monitoring of endog-
enous metabolome, short- and long-term exposome. Front. Chem. 9,
674265. https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2021.674265.
102. Cikach, F.S., Jr., and Dweik, R.A. (2012). Cardiovascular biomarkers in
exhaled breath. Prog. Cardiovasc. Dis. 55, 34–43. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pcad.2012.05.005.
103. Ibrahim, W., Carr, L., Cordell, R., Wilde, M.J., Salman, D., Monks, P.S.,
Thomas, P., Brightling, C.E., Siddiqui, S., and Greening, N.J. (2021).
Breathomics for the clinician: the use of volatile organic compounds in
respiratory diseases. Thorax 76, 514–521. https://doi.org/10.1136/thor-
axjnl-2020-215667.
104. Kononikhin, A.S., Brzhozovskiy, A.G., Ryabokon, A.M., Fedorchenko, K.,
Zakharova, N.V., Spasskii, A.I., Popov, I.A., Ilyin, V.K., Solovyova, Z.O.,
Pastushkova, L.K., et al. (2019). Proteome proﬁling of the exhaled breath
condensate after long-term spaceﬂights. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 4518.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20184518.
105. Hauschild, A.-C., Frisch, T., Baumbach, J.I., and Baumbach, J. (2015).
Carotta: revealing hidden confounder markers in metabolic breath pro-
ﬁles. Metabolites 5, 344–363. https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo5020344.
106. Campanella, A., De Summa, S., and Tommasi, S. (2019). Exhaled breath
condensate biomarkers for lung cancer. J. Breath Res. 13, 044002.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1752-7163/ab2f9f.
107. Mitchell, C., Ordish, J., Johnson, E., Brigden, T., and Hall, A. (2020). The
GDPR and Genomic Data—The Impact of the GDPR and DPA 2018 on
Genomic Healthcare and Research.
108. Haendel, M., Vasilevsky, N., Unni, D., Bologa, C., Harris, N., Rehm, H.,
Hamosh, A., Baynam, G., Groza, T., McMurry, J., et al. (2020). How
many rare diseases are there? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19, 77–78.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41573-019-00180-y.
109. Nguengang Wakap, S., Lambert, D.M., Olry, A., Rodwell, C., Gueydan,
C., Lanneau, V., Murphy, D., Le Cam, Y., and Rath, A. (2020). Estimating
cumulative point prevalence of rare diseases: analysis of the Orphanet
database. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 28, 165–173. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41431-019-0508-0.
110. Nguyen, M.T., Goldblatt, J., Isasi, R., Jagut, M., Jonker, A.H., Kaufmann,
P., Ouillade, L., Molnar-Gabor, F., Shabani, M., Sid, E., et al. (2019).
Model consent clauses for rare disease research. BMC Med. Ethics 20,
55. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910-019-0390-x.
111. Shabani, M., and Marelli, L. (2019). Re-identiﬁability of genomic data and
the GDPR: assessing the re-identiﬁability of genomic data in light of the
EU General Data Protection Regulation. EMBO Rep. 20, e48316.
https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201948316.
112. Lippert, C., Sabatini, R., Maher, M.C., Kang, E.Y., Lee, S., Arikan, O., Har-
ley, A., Bernal, A., Garst, P., Lavrenko, V., et al. (2017). Identiﬁcation of
individuals by trait prediction using whole-genome sequencing data.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 10166–10171. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1711125114.
113. Harmanci, A., and Gerstein, M. (2016). Quantiﬁcation of private informa-
tion leakage from phenotype-genotype data: linking attacks. Nat.
Methods 13, 251–256. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3746.
114. G€ursoy, G., Li, T., Liu, S., Ni, E., Brannon, C.M., and Gerstein, M.B.
(2021). Functional genomics data: privacy risk assessment and techno-
logical mitigation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 23, 245–258.
115. Elhaik, E., Ahsanuddin, S., Robinson, J.M., Foster, E.M., and Mason, C.E.
(2021). The impact of cross-kingdom molecular forensics on genetic pri-
vacy. Microbiome 9, 114. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-021-01076-z.
116. Bandeira, N., Deutsch, E.W., Kohlbacher, O., Martens, L., and Vizcaı´no,
J.A. (2021). Data management of sensitive human proteomics data: cur-
rent practices, recommendations, and perspectives for the future. Mol.
Cell. Proteomics 20, 100071. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.
100071.
117. Dupras, C., and Bunnik, E.M. (2021). Toward a framework for assessing
privacy risks in multi-omic research and databases. Am. J. Bioeth. 21,
46–64. https://doi.org/10.1080/15265161.2020.1863516.
118. World Medical Association (2013). World Medical Association Declara-
tion of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical research involving human
subjects. JAMA 310, 2191–2194. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.
281053.
119. Hallinan, D. (2020). Broad consent under the GDPR: an optimistic
perspective on a bright future. Life Sci Soc Policy 16, 1. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s40504-019-0096-3.
120. Shabani, M., and Borry, P. (2018). Rules for processing genetic data for
research purposes in view of the new EU General Data Protection Regu-
lation. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 26, 149–156. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-
017-0045-7.
121. Reed, R.D., and Antonsen, E.L. (2018). Should NASA collect astronauts’
genetic information for occupational surveillance and research? AMA J
Ethics 20, E849–E856. https://doi.org/10.1001/amajethics.2018.849.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
15
Perspective

122. Antonsen, E.L., and Reed, R.D. (2019). Policy considerations for preci-
sion medicine in human spaceﬂight. Hous. J. Health L. & Pol’y 19, 1.
123. Joly, Y., Dupras, C., Pinkesz, M., Tovino, S.A., and Rothstein, M.A.
(2020). Looking beyond GINA: policy approaches to address genetic
discrimination. Annu. Rev. Genom. Hum. Genet. 21, 491–507. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-111119-011436.
124. Molna´ r-Ga´ bor, F., and Korbel, J.O. (2020). Genomic data sharing in Eu-
rope is stumbling-Could a code of conduct prevent its fall? EMBO Mol.
Med. 12, e11421. https://doi.org/10.15252/emmm.201911421.
125. Molna´ r-Ga´ bor, F., Sellner, J., Pagil, S., Slokenberga, S., Tzortzatou-
Nanopoulou, O., and Nystro¨ m, K. (2021). Harmonization after the
GDPR? Divergences in the rules for genetic and health data sharing in
four member states and ways to overcome them by EU measures: in-
sights from Germany, Greece, Latvia and Sweden. Semin. Cancer Biol.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2021.12.001.
126. Berrios, D.C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S., and Costes, S.V.
(2021). NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D1515–D1522. https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gkaa887.
127. Madrigal, P., Gabel, A., Villacampa, A., Manzano, A., Deane, C.S., Bez-
dan, D., Carnero-Diaz, E., Medina, F.J., Hardiman, G., Grosse, I., et al.
(2020). Revamping space-omics in Europe. Cell Syst 11, 555–556.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.10.006.
128. Hallinan, D., Bernier, A., Cambon-Thomsen, A., Crawley, F.P., Dimitrova,
D., Medeiros, C.B., Nilsonne, G., Parker, S., Pickering, B., and Rennes, S.
(2021). International transfers of personal data for health research
following Schrems II: a problem in need of a solution. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
29, 1502–1509. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-021-00893-y.
129. Saunders, G., Baudis, M., Becker, R., Beltran, S., Be´ roud, C., Birney, E.,
Brooksbank, C., Brunak, S., Van den Bulcke, M., Drysdale, R., et al.
(2019). Leveraging European infrastructures to access 1 million human
genomes by 2022. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 693–701. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41576-019-0156-9.
130. Thorogood, A., Rehm, H.L., Goodhand, P., Page, A.J.H., Joly, Y., Baudis,
M., Rambla, J., Navarro, A., Nyronen, T.H., Linden, M., et al. (2021).
International federation of genomic medicine databases using GA4GH
standards. Cell Genom 1, 100032. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xgen.2021.
100032.
131. Rehm, H.L., Page, A.J.H., Smith, L., Adams, J.B., Alterovitz, G., Babb,
L.J., Barkley, M.P., Baudis, M., Beauvais, M.J.S., Beck, T., et al.
(2021). GA4GH: international policies and standards for data sharing
across genomic research and healthcare. Cell Genom 1, 100029.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xgen.2021.100029.
132. Jochems, A., Deist, T.M., van Soest, J., Eble, M., Bulens, P., Coucke, P.,
Dries, W., Lambin, P., and Dekker, A. (2016). Distributed learning: devel-
oping a predictive model based on data from multiple hospitals without
data leaving the hospital - a real life proof of concept. Radiother. Oncol.
121, 459–467. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2016.10.002.
133. G€ursoy, G., Emani, P., Brannon, C.M., Jolanki, O.A., Harmanci, A., Strat-
tan, J.S., Cherry, J.M., Miranker, A.D., and Gerstein, M. (2020). Data sani-
tization to reduce private information leakage from functional genomics.
Cell 183, 905–917.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.036.
134. Rieke, N., Hancox, J., Li, W., Milletarı`, F., Roth, H.R., Albarqouni, S., Ba-
kas, S., Galtier, M.N., Landman, B.A., Maier-Hein, K., et al. (2020). The
future of digital health with federated learning. NPJ Digit Med 3, 119.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-020-00323-1.
135. Truong, N., Sun, K., Wang, S., Guitton, F., and Guo, Y. (2021). Privacy
preservation in federated learning: an insightful survey from the GDPR
perspective. Comput. Secur. 110, 102402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cose.2021.102402.
About the author
Henry Cope is a PhD student at the United Kingdom Engineering and Physical
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)-funded Horizon Centre for Doctoral
Training at the University of Nottingham, UK. The research involves investiga-
tion of data science approaches for space biology, with the goal of improving
human health in space. This includes analysis of spaceﬂight-derived biological
datasets via bioinformatics and computer vision approaches. Additionally,
barriers to data science in the ﬁeld of space biology are considered, including
standardization of data and metadata and the ethical and legal challenges per-
taining to astronaut personal data.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
Patterns 3, September 9, 2022
Perspective
