Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Secretome proﬁling reveals acute changes in
oxidative stress, brain homeostasis, and
coagulation following short-duration
spaceﬂight
A list of authors and their afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper
As spaceﬂight becomes more common with commercial crews, blood-based
measures of crew health can guide both astronaut biomedicine and counter-
measures. By proﬁling plasma proteins, metabolites, and extracellular vesicles/
particles (EVPs) from the SpaceX Inspiration4 crew, we generated “spaceﬂight
secretome proﬁles,” which showed signiﬁcant differences in coagulation,
oxidative stress, and brain-enriched proteins. While >93% of differentially
abundant proteins (DAPs) in vesicles and metabolites recovered within six
months, the majority (73%) of plasma DAPs were still perturbed post-ﬂight.
Moreover, these proteomic alterations correlated better with peripheral blood
mononuclear cells than whole blood, suggesting that immune cells contribute
more DAPs than erythrocytes. Finally, to discern possible mechanisms leading
to brain-enriched protein detection and blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption,
we examined protein changes in dissected brains of spaceﬂight mice, which
showed increases in PECAM-1, a marker of BBB integrity. These data highlight
how even short-duration spaceﬂight can disrupt human and murine physiol-
ogy and identify spaceﬂight biomarkers that can guide countermeasure
development.
As spaceﬂight and long-term human missions become more attain-
able, minimally invasive approaches to monitor physiological
responses to spaceﬂight in diverse populations will be key to pre-
venting acute and long-term complications1. The plasma proteome
provides a catalog of proteins circulating in the blood, and thus it can
paint an informative picture of the systemic physiological state of
astronauts2, yet there are scant studies of astronaut plasma pro-
teomics. Previous plasma proteomic studies of long-duration
spaceﬂight reported changes in platelet function, coagulation,
hemostasis, immune function, and metabolism3–5. In addition, var-
ious ground-based analog studies (i.e. head-down bed rest) have
reported blood proteomic changes including complement activa-
tion, acute inﬂammatory responses, ﬁbrinolysis, and thrombosis6,7.
Moreover, da Silveira et al. demonstrated that mitochondrial
disruption and oxidative stress were the key hubs for increased
health risks7, based on miRNA biomarkers in plasma.
Plasma-circulating extracellular vesicles and particles (EVPs) and
metabolites provide additional information regarding the cellular
phenotype and state of distal organs and tissues8,9. EVPs are actively
released into the peripheral circulation at concentrations of > 109
vesicles/mL, and are demonstrated biomarkers in cancer8, traumatic
brain injury10, and autoimmune diseases11. Thus, EVP cargo analysis
could be used to monitor health risks associated with space explora-
tion, such as spaceﬂight-associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS)12
and thrombosis13,14, but studies of spaceﬂight-induced changes in EVP
cargo have been limited15. Moreover, for metabolites, prior missions
have focused on markers of bone metabolism and musculoskeletal
deconditioning, including increased osteogenesis and resorption
Received: 9 November 2023
Accepted: 15 May 2024
Check for updates
e-mail: irm2224@med.cornell.edu; chm2042@med.cornell.edu
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

markers (e.g., osteocalcin, sclerostin, parathyroid hormone, osteo-
protegerin, and RANKL) in the blood of crew members16–19, and could
beneﬁt from a wider proﬁle. The decreased muscular activity asso-
ciated with spaceﬂight leads to a loss of nitrogen and an inability to
maintain whole-body protein synthesis rates, exacerbated by hypoca-
loric intake20, but this has not been examined in EVPs or metabolites in
recent missions. Prior missions have also revealed spaceﬂight anemia,
with circulating red blood cells and plasma volume decreases of
10–15%, leading to increased iron availability21, though the effect of
these changes on EVP cargo is unknown.
The NASA Twins study provided the ﬁrst proﬁle and multi-omic
analysis of the plasma proteome, EVP proteome, and plasma meta-
bolome, namely from a one-year, long-duration mission22. For that
study, EVP protein cargo showed changes related to physiological
stress, systemic inﬂammation, and the ﬁrst indication of brain-derived
proteins in plasma-circulating EVPs15. However, the NASA Twins study
only used untargeted plasma proteomics (capturing 292 proteins) to
discern an increased ratio of apolipoprotein B (APOB) to apolipopro-
tein A1 (APO1)22. Of the 60 plasma metabolites involved in the tri-
carboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, glycolysis, amino acid, fatty acid, ketone
body, and pyrimidine metabolism, no signiﬁcant changes for in-ﬂight
levels were found22. However, it is necessary to expand the NASA Twins
study ﬁndings to an increased number of samples, larger coverage of
metabolomics, broader coverage of plasma proteomics, longitudinal
data of EVP proteomics, and a systematic integration and meta-
analysis of secretome changes with other multi-omic data7.
The SpaceX inspiration4 (i4) mission provided the ﬁrst opportu-
nity for such an expanded study, and it also was notable as the ﬁrst all-
civilian space ﬂight mission, featuring 2 male and 2 female astronauts
aged 29 to 50 years, who traveled into space for 3 days in orbit at
590 km altitude. We proﬁled the spaceﬂight secretome (plasma pro-
teome and metabolome, and EVP proteome) of the i4 astronauts at
three pre-ﬂight (L-92, L-44, L-3) and three post-ﬂight timepoints (R + 1,
R + 45, R + 82). We performed differential and pathway enrichment
analysis of the proteome and metabolome to reveal the biological
landscape of the secretome changes induced by 3-day spaceﬂight.
Then, we delineated the contribution of blood and immune cells by
comparing secretome and transcriptomic proﬁles obtained from the i4
single-nuclei PBMC and whole-blood RNA-seq. We performed thio-
barbituric acid reactive substance assay (TBARS) measurement assays,
EVP immune cell marker proﬁling, Western blots, and ELISA to validate
ﬁndings. The unique insight of integrating these different modalities
(proteomics, metabolomics, and transcriptomics) in our study pro-
vides the largest comprehensive assessment of the systemic physio-
logic and secreted changes resulting from spaceﬂight exposure to date.
Results
Changes in the proteomic proﬁle of plasma and EVPs after 3-day
spaceﬂight
To gain insight into secretome changes after 3 days of spaceﬂight, we
proﬁled the plasma EVP proteins and plasma metabolites of the four i4
mission crew members (Fig. 1a) at three pre-launch dates (L-92, L-44,
and L-3) and three post-ﬂight timepoints upon return to Earth (R + 1,
R + 45, R + 82) (Fig. 1a). For plasma proteomics, plasma was isolated
using Cell Preparation Tubes (CPT) and processed with Seer’s
5-nanoparticle Proteograph assay23, while plasma EVPs were isolated as
previously described24,25, and proteins were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/
MS (Fig. 1a). Plasma metabolites were extracted using Aqueous Neutral
Phase (ANP) hydrophilic and C18 hydrophobic liquid chromatography,
and metabolites were identiﬁed and quantiﬁed by MS (Fig. 1a). We
identiﬁed a total of 2,992 unique plasma proteins and 1,443 unique EVP
proteins, with an overlap of 1,030 proteins shared by plasma and EVPs
(Fig. 1b). These shared proteins are likely plasma EVP proteins as well as
proteins that can be either soluble/free or EVP-associated. Plasma and
EVP proteins were then ﬁltered based on the number of not-detected
(NAs) so that at least one condition has no missing data and coefﬁcient
of variation (<0.5), with 1,765 plasma circulating proteins remaining in
plasma and 527 in EVPs (Fig. 1b).
To proﬁle acute and long-term changes in the secretome after
3-days of spaceﬂight, we performed two comparisons: 1) immediately
post-ﬂight (R + 1) vs. all pre-ﬂight (L-92, L-44, L-3) timepoints, as a
measure of acute changes (short-term postﬂight, or SP) and 2) all post-
ﬂight (R + 1, R + 45, R + 82) vs. all pre-ﬂight (L-92, L-44, L-3) timepoints,
representing long-term changes (long-term postﬂight, or LP). Inter-
estingly, even though fewer unique proteins were detected in EVPs, we
identiﬁed more differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in EVPs com-
pared to plasma (151 DAPs in EVPs vs. 40 DAPs in plasma) at R + 1
(Fig. 1c, Supplementary Fig. 1). Importantly, the majority of EVP DAPs
returned to pre-ﬂight levels over time, with only 10 EVP DAPs (6.62%)
remaining differentially abundant long-term post-ﬂight (Fig. 1c).
However, most plasma DAPs (72.5%) remained differentially abundant
at the last timepoint (R + 82) (Fig. 1c), indicating a greater degree of
recovery, and longer duration, than the EVP DAPs.
In addition, the EVP and plasma proteomes provided distinct
information about spaceﬂight-associated changes. Speciﬁcally, 9 DAPs
were shared between EVPs (5.96%) and plasma (22.5%) immediately
post-ﬂight (Fig. 1c). The 9 overlapping DAPs were Platelet factor 4
(PF4), Latent-transforming growth factor beta-binding protein 1
(LTBP1), Platelet factor 4 variant 1 (PF4V1), Alpha-synuclein (SNCA),
Peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2), Fibronectin 1 (FN1), Axin interactor, dorsa-
lization associated (AIDA), Multimerin 1 (MMRN1), and Intercellular
adhesion molecule 3 (ICAM3) (Fig. 1d). Of these, PRDX2 and SNCA
increased, while ICAM3 decreased in both EVPs and plasma. Since
PRDX2 is an antioxidant enzyme26, its elevation in EVPs and plasma at
R + 1 may indicate elevated oxidative stress. Increased SNCA level in
the blood, including in EVPs, is a potential indicator of brain inﬂam-
mation and stress27,28. Also of note, ICAM3 downregulation may reﬂect
impairments in T cell-Dendritic cell (T-DC) interactions and immune
function, as ICAM3 is crucial for the initial interaction between these
two immune cells29. In addition, proteins associated with wound
healing and coagulation, including PF4, PF4V1, and LTBP1, were
increased in the plasma, but decreased in EVPs, potentially as a con-
sequence of EVP capture in clots associated with spaceﬂight-induced
thrombosis (Fig. 1d and Supplrmentary Fig. 1)14,15. However, PF4 and
PF4V1 levels quickly returned to baseline, suggesting that the pro-
thrombotic effect of spaceﬂight is temporary and reversible; these
shifts of PF4 in plasma and EVPs were conﬁrmed by ELISA (Supple-
mentary Fig. 2a, b).
To gain a functional understanding of plasma and EVP proteome
changes after spaceﬂight, we performed biological pathway enrich-
ment analysis for the R + 1 DAPs in both plasma and EVPs. Interest-
ingly, though individual DAPs mostly differed in plasma relative to
EVPs, pathways enriched in these DAPs showed a consistent proﬁle in
plasma and EVPs. DAPs involved in reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production, oxidative stress, wound healing, coagulation, immune
function, and hemostasis pathways were enriched in both plasma and
EVP proﬁles (Fig. 1e, f). These ﬁndings indicate that the plasma
secretome reﬂects the hematologic changes (hemostasis, wound
healing, coagulation), immune response/inﬂammation changes, and
molecular changes in ROS metabolism after the 3-day spaceﬂight. We
also note the increased abundance of several proteins related to the
complement pathway, such as FCN3 which remains upregulated even
at R + 45. This was validated in EVPs by western blotting (Supple-
mentary Fig. 2c).
Changes in the metabolic proﬁle of plasma after 3-day
spaceﬂight
To capture spaceﬂight-related metabolic changes, we next proﬁled
1,135 metabolites in the plasma of the i4 crew using ANP hydrophilic
and C18 hydrophobic liquid chromatography coupled with mass
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
2

spectrometry30. Differential analyses of the metabolomics data iden-
tiﬁed a variety of metabolic pathways affected by spaceﬂight, with 100
differentially abundant metabolites (DAMs) identiﬁed when compar-
ing the pre-ﬂight (L-92, L-44, L-3) to immediately post-ﬂight (R + 1)
timepoint (Fig. 2a, b). Notably, none of these DAMs remained differ-
entially abundant at timepoints after R + 1, indicating that these
metabolic changes are acute, and also that metabolic homeostasis is
restored rapidly upon return to Earth.
Of the metabolites affected immediately post-ﬂight, those
involved in the purine metabolism pathway showed systematically
increased abundance. Inosine, the metabolite with the largest positive
fold-change (Fig. 2b), together with its precursor metabolite, purine,
and its post-degradation metabolites, xanthine, and hypoxanthine, are
all components of purine metabolism (Fig. 2c). We found that many of
the most signiﬁcantly altered metabolites belonged to the glycer-
ophospholipid metabolism pathway (Fig. 2a), likely driven by a
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
3

decreased abundance of lysophospholipid (LysoPC) and phosphati-
dylcholine (PC) species such as methylcarbamoyl platelet-activating
factor (PAF) C-16 and LysoPAF C-16 (Fig. 2b, c)31. Accompanying these
changes, many metabolites involved in the sphingomyelin cycle were
differentially abundant, including an increase in uridine diphosphate
(UDP), some sphingomyelin and glucosylceramides (GlcCer) species,
and a decrease in sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) (Fig. 2c, d).
Since phosphatidylcholines (PCs) are the most abundant phos-
pholipid species in cellular membranes, and membrane stability is
disrupted by lipid peroxidation, we hypothesized that the decrease
in PCs and LysoPCs (Fig. 2d) was indicative of lipid peroxidation
secondary to spaceﬂight-induced production of free radicals32,33. The
lipid peroxidation cascade generates a number of different inter-
mediates depending on the target lipid species34. Malondialdehyde
(MDA) is one of the major byproducts of lipid peroxidation and
widely used as a biomarker of oxidative stress34. Therefore, to mea-
sure the overall lipid peroxidation in plasma, we quantiﬁed the levels
of MDA adducts with thiobarbituric acid (TBA) using the thiobarbi-
turic acid reactive substance assay (TBARS assay) (Fig. 2e), which
revealed that lipid peroxidation was signiﬁcantly increased (p-
value = 0.0013) immediately post-ﬂight (R + 1) and returned to base-
line levels after several weeks (R + 45).
Upregulation in production of antioxidants in the plasma and
EVPs in response to spaceﬂight
We next investigated the common signature of oxidative stress and
cellular detoxiﬁcation found in EVP and plasma DAPs35,36 (Supple-
mentary Fig. 3). Speciﬁcally, ROS scavenging is dependent on ROOH
and H2O2 detoxiﬁcation via superoxide dismutase (SOD1, SOD2),
catalase (CAT), and peroxiredoxins37,38. Compared to ground con-
trols, plasma from post-ﬂight astronauts displayed an upregulation
of antioxidant proteins and a distinct metabolic proﬁle retained at
both the immediate and long post-ﬂight timepoints (Fig. 3a). Anti-
oxidant proteins were also signiﬁcantly enriched in EVPs in the
intermediate post-ﬂight timepoint, along with metabolic proteins
involved in anabolic metabolism and cell growth, which may improve
donor cells’ antioxidant capacity and cell bioenergetics36,39–41. Our
ﬁndings indicate the body upregulates the production of anabolic
metabolism and antioxidants in the plasma and EVPs, especially in
the immediate-post-ﬂight timepoint, likely to compensate for
increased ROS (Fig. 3a). At the longterm post-ﬂight timepoint, these
protein levels are abolished in the EVPs, but not in the plasma, which
maintains an upregulation of antioxidant proteins and an altered
metabolic proﬁle. These data indicate that intracellular ROS levels
and metabolic proﬁles can remain differentially abundant following
spaceﬂight for at least 80 days after landing.
Integrating proteomics and metabolomics reveals a common
signature of antioxidant defense and immune dysregulation
To investigate the molecular processes at the interface of altered
proteins
and
metabolites,
we
undertook
a
correlation-based,
integrated approach. Speciﬁcally, we correlated the proteins and
metabolites across all timepoints, using the annotated DAPs and DAMs
altered immediately post-ﬂight (R + 1) compared to pre-ﬂight (L-92, L-
44, L-3). As a result, we identiﬁed 26 signiﬁcant (False Discovery Ratio
(FDR) < 5%) correlations between plasma proteins and plasma meta-
bolites. In contrast, 1,416 correlations were signiﬁcant between EVP
proteins and plasma metabolites (Fig. 3b). The signiﬁcantly correlated
molecules were visualized as a network with proteins and metabolites
as nodes, and the correlation between them as edges. Among these
changes, two of the most commonly observed molecular changes
post-ﬂight were oxidative stress and immune dysregulation, as dis-
cussed below1,22,42–47.
First, we analyzed the interface between the ROS pathway and
metabolites by correlating the proteins in the ROS pathway with
metabolites. Exposure to radiation, microgravity, and hypoxia during
spaceﬂight all induce the production of free radicals leading to oxi-
dative stress, which can impact on cardiovascular, immune, neurolo-
gical, and metabolic systems1. The ROS subnetwork from the i4 crew
consisted of 26 nodes, including 6 proteins and 20 metabolites, with
38 correlation-based edges between the metabolites and proteins
(Fig. 3c). All 6 proteins (100%) and 12 metabolites (60%) were lower
post-ﬂight, and 8 metabolites (40%) were higher post-ﬂight. Within this
subnetwork, three antioxidant enzymes from the peroxiredoxin family
(PRDX1, PRDX2, PRDX6) which scavenge peroxides within cells48, were
increased immediately post-ﬂight. In addition, three other enzymes
that degrade ROS, namely SOD1, CAT and glutamate-cysteine ligase
(GCLC), were also increased post-ﬂight. SOD1 catalyzes the conversion
of superoxide into hydrogen peroxide, which CAT can then degrade49.
GCLC is a rate-limiting enzyme for the de novo synthesis of glu-
tathione, a widely studied antioxidant that maintains the cellular redox
balance50. Moreover, antioxidants, including inosine and taurine, were
signiﬁcantly increased immediately post-ﬂight (q-value < 0.05). In
addition to its antioxidant capacities, inosine dampens cytokine pro-
duction, normally ameliorating inﬂammation51,52,6,53. Taurine is also an
antioxidant that protects immune cells during oxidative stress54, and
its upregulation suggests that immediate post-ﬂight antioxidant pro-
duction compensates for spaceﬂight-induced oxidative stress.
We next analyzed the interface between the immune system and
metabolism by correlating immune cell markers with speciﬁc meta-
bolites. The immune subnetwork consisted of 56 nodes, including 10
proteins and 46 metabolites, with 95 correlation-based edges between
the metabolites and proteins (Fig. 3d). All 10 proteins (100%) and 33
metabolites (71.7%) were lower immediately post-ﬂight, and 13 meta-
bolites (28.3%) were higher immediately post-ﬂight. Within this sub-
network, all the protein markers of immune cells were decreased
immediately post-ﬂight. Moreover, our analysis indicated that anti-
inﬂammatory and antioxidant molecules, namely inosine, purines, and
taurine, were increased immediately post-ﬂight. While taurine and
inosine are antioxidants51,54, purines (e.g., adenosine) modulate the
immune system by inhibiting the production of pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines and free radicals51. In addition, 4-aminobutanoate (GABA), an
Fig. 1 | Changes in the proteomic proﬁle of plasma and EVPs after 3-day
spaceﬂight. a Overview of study design, sample collection, and processing of
plasma and EVP proteomics. b Venn diagram of proteins measured in plasma and
EVP, before (left) and after (right) ﬁltering, based on the coefﬁcient of variance, low
abundance, and number of not assessed (NAs). c Upset plot showing the overlap of
differentially abundant proteins (adjusted p-value < 0.05, |logFC | >1) across the
different comparisons performed in plasma and EVPs. Differential abundance
analysis was performed with limma with the following model ~astronaut+ﬂightSa-
tus and p-values have been adjusted to control the false discovery rate d Boxplots
of the scaled abundance of the 9 proteins differentially abundant in both plasma
and EVPs. Where available, data represents n = 4 astronauts averaged at the indi-
cated condition (preﬂight and long-term postﬂight). Plasma data is the average of
two technical replicates, EVP data represents one technical replicate per astronaut
and timepoint. Boxes show the quartiles of the dataset while the whiskers extend to
show the rest of the distribution except for outliers. e Gene Ontology enrichment
was performed using clusterProﬁler::enrichGO() on differentially abundant pro-
teins in plasma (adjusted p-value < 0.05, |logFC | >1) at R + 1 vs. Preﬂight. Biological
processes (BP) were selected, and treeplot was used to organize signiﬁcant path-
ways (adjusted p-value < 0.05) into biologically relevant clusters. f Gene Ontology
enrichment was performed using clusterProﬁler::enrichGO() on differentially
abundant proteins in the EVPs (adjusted p-value < 0.05, |logFC | >1) at R + 1 vs.
Preﬂight. Biological processes were selected, and treeplot was used to organize and
cluster the signiﬁcant pathways (adjusted p-value < 0.05) into biologically relevant
clusters. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
4

immune-modulatory neurotransmitter, was also increased immedi-
ately post-ﬂight, which can inhibit cytokine production55,56. This sub-
network may reﬂect widespread inﬂammation preceding the post-
ﬂight immunosuppression and anti-inﬂammatory responses, con-
sistent with some of the NASA Twins Study results22 and studies of
physiological stress, radiation, altered circadian rhythm42,43, and reac-
tivation of latent herpes viruses44,57.
Immune cells contribute to the observed secretome changes
after spaceﬂight
To delineate the contribution of immune cells to the secretome, we
compared our proteomic data to single nuclei gene expression of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from the i4 crew using
the 10X Genomics single-cell multi-ome kits for epigenetic and gene
expression proﬁling (see Methods). Of the ~30,000 genes detected in
b. 
d. 
0
2
4
6
−2
−1
0
1
2
log2 fold change
log2 fold change
Pre-Flight
Immediately Post-Flight
LysoPC(15:0)
LysoPC(14:0)
LysoPC(17:0)
Inosine
Sphingosine 1−phosphate
LysoPC(16:1)
UDP
Xanthine
LysoPC(18:0)
LysoPC(16:0)
FDR 5%
Sphingomyelin
Ceramide
Sphingosine
Sphingosine-1-phosphate
Glucosylceramide (GlcCer)
Galactosylceramide
Phosphatidylcholine
Diacylglycerol
LysoPhosphatidylcholine (LysoPC)
CDP-choline
Glycerophosphocholine
Phosphocholine
FDR=0.085
UDP-glucose
UDP
GlcCer (d42:1) [M+Na]+
GlcCer (d42:1) [M+H]+
Protoporphyrin
c. 
Purine Metabolism
Glycerophospholipid Metabolism
Anemia Markers
Xanthine
Purine
Inosine
Hypoxanthine
Metabolite Abundance
UDP
LysoPC(15:0)
Sphingosine 1−phosphate
Metabolite Abundance
Metabolite
Abundance
e. 
a. 
Lipid Metabolism
Amino Acids
Nucleotide Metabolism
Cofactor, Vitamin and Antioxidant metabolism
Methylcarbamyl−PAF
Lyso−PAF
Protoporphyrin
Timepoints:
Timepoints:
Astronauts:
Astronauts:
Significant 
Not significant
L-92;L-44;L-3
R+1
R+45;R+82
µM TBARS
-log10(p-value)
-log10(p-value)
Astronauts:
Astronauts:
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
5

PBMCs, 273 genes were detected in both plasma and EVPs (Fig. 4a). In
addition, 1131 genes were uniquely reﬂected in the plasma proteome
while 163 genes were uniquely found in the EVP proteome (Fig. 4a).
When comparing the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of
PBMCs with the plasma DAPs and EVP DAPs (Fig. 4a), we found that 12
(30%) plasma DAPs and 27 (17.8%) EVP DAPs were also differentially
expressed in the PBMCs. Of those overlapping DAPs, 6/12 were dif-
ferentially abundant in the same direction in both plasma and PBMCs.
Additionally, 14/27 of the overlapping EVP DAPs were differentially
abundant in the same direction in both EVPs and PBMCs. This likely
indicates that circulating and EVP proteins reﬂect gene expression
changes in immune cells, while validating that secreted proteins can
also originate from non-immune cells and distal organs.
To further examine the connection between the EVP proteome
and the PBMCs transcriptional states, we examined the overlap
between EVP DAPs and PBMC DEGs. The crew EVP proﬁles showed a
higher overlap with the DEGs among lymphoid cells (T cell, B cell,
Natural Killer (NK) cell) than with myeloid cells (Fig. 4b), and the same
trend was observed for plasma DAPs (Fig. 4b), indicating that lymphoid
cells contributed more than myeloid cells to the observed changes in
the secretome. Among the genes differentially abundant in EVPs and
PBMCs, we noted several immune genes such as Integrin linked kinase
(ILK), which was upregulated in EVPs and PBMCs, while carbonic
anhydrase 8 (C8A) and complement C8 beta chain (C8B) were down-
regulated in EVPs and PBMCs (Fig. 4c).
Among the antioxidant and oxidative stress-related proteins,
PRDX2 was again upregulated in both plasma and EVPs, but was
downregulated in DC cells, Monocytes, T cells and B cells, indicating
that the upregulation of PRDX2 and EVPs seen in plasma does not
originate from immune cells (Fig. 4c). To disentangle the relationship
between immune cells and the pathways enriched based on the
secretome DAPs, we calculated the fold changes of normalized
enrichment score (NES) of immune cells at R + 1 versus pre-ﬂight for
the signiﬁcantly enriched secretome DAPs pathways related to coa-
gulation, immune function, lipid metabolism, oxidative stress, platelet
activation, and reactive oxygen stress (Fig. 4d and Supplementary
Fig. 3). We found an enrichment in oxidative stress and ROS pathways
in T cells, NK cells, monocytes, and DC at R + 1 compared to pre-ﬂight
timepoints.
To gain insight into potential cellular sources of plasma EVPs, we
used the MACSPlex Exosome proﬁler, which estimates the abundance
of EVs expressing one of 37 markers speciﬁc for various immune cell
types. We found signiﬁcant increases in the pan-EVP marker CD958,59,
integrin beta-1 (ITGB1, also CD29)60, and B/T activation marker
(CD69)61 and signiﬁcant decreases in Alveolar Type I/Brain (Receptor
tyrosine kinase like orphan receptor, ROR1)62–64, melanocytes (Mela-
noma chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan, MCSP)65,66, T cells (CD3)67,
additional pan-EVP markers (CD6368, CD81), B cell (CD24)69, and DC
(CD1C)70 markers (Fig. 4e). The increase in CD9 at R + 1 correlates with
an overall increase in EVP production post-ﬂight15, while the decrease
in CD63 and CD81 at R + 1 is consistent with the increase in CD9+ EVPs
produced by platelets involved in coagulation. Of note, CD69 (a T and
B cell activation marker) was increased at R + 1, consistent with
inﬂammation revealed by the other omics analyses. The increase in
ITGB1 (CD29), which complexes with integrin subunit alpha 5 (ITGA5,
also CD49e)71, a heterodimer expressed on activated lymphocytes,
endothelial cells (ECs), osteoblasts and which binds ﬁbronectin and L1
cell adhesion molecule (L1CAM, a central nervous system axonal pro-
tein), may be consistent with vascular permeability, and systemic
inﬂammation. Several DC markers, CD24, CD1c, and CD209, were also
decreased at R + 1, consistent with suppressed DC function.
We hypothesized that the signiﬁcantly changed immune markers
in EVPs would overlap with the i4 immune cell DEGs (Supplementary
Fig. 4). Indeed, we found that while DEGs in PBMCs were driven more
by T and B cells, all cell types showed changes in vesicle regulation
(Supplementary Fig. 5). CD3 delta, a pan-T cell marker, was down-
regulated in PBMCs, T cells, and their EVPs, whereas a different T cell
marker (CD69) was downregulated in cells, but enriched in EVPs. This
could indicate that CD69 is selectively shuttled into EVPs, or selectively
enriched in EVPs derived from tissue-resident memory T cells. More-
over, CD63 was consistently downregulated in innate immune cells
(DC, NK, macrophages) and EVPs immediately post-ﬂight, indicating
that cellular reduction was responsible for decreased EVP CD63 levels.
Red blood cells do not contribute to secretome changes after
spaceﬂight
To delineate the contribution of blood cells to the secretome, we
compared the gene expression proﬁles of whole blood direct RNA-seq
data (Oxford Nanopore) from the i4 crew and identiﬁed 61 overlapping
DEGs. We then compared the gene list with the plasma and EVP DAPs
(Supplementary Fig. 6a, b). Interestingly, protein abundances in EVPs
and gene expression in whole blood were inversely correlated
(increased in EVPs and decreased in whole blood). The expression of
these genes in PBMCs, however, was mostly aligned with the protein
abundance, with at least one cell type showing a signiﬁcant increase in
PBMCs for SNCA. Of note, SNCA overlapped in whole blood DEGs,
plasma DAPs, and EVP DAPs.
Overall, 8 genes were shared between whole blood DEGs and EVP
DAPs and one gene was shared between blood DEGs and plasma DAPs.
To determine the contribution of whole blood and PBMC to the
secretome, we then examined expression of these overlapping DAPs
(AHSP, AK1, ANK1, BLVRB, EPB42, HBD, ENBP1, SNCA) before and after
spaceﬂight (Supplementary Fig. 6c), and analyzed this list for enriched
gene functions. Signiﬁcant enrichment (q < 0.01) was observed in
heme metabolism, anemia, hematologic disease, brain function
(terminal
button,
axon
part)-related
pathways
(Supplementary
Fig. 6d). The gene SLC4A1 was present in nearly all overrepresented
groups (excluding the cell cortex and axon part), indicating a brain-
related phenotype that warranted further investigation.
Brain-related signatures increased in the secretome after
spaceﬂight
Spaceﬂight exposes the human brain to several stressors, which have
the potential to cause short-term and long-term neurological effects,
Fig. 2 | Changes in plasma metabolites after 3-day spaceﬂight. a Pie charts
showing pathway annotations of differentially abundant metabolites (adjusted
p-value < 0.05, |logFC | >1) at R + 1 vs. Preﬂight. Gray portions of the pie chart
represent measured but insigniﬁcant metabolites in the speciﬁed category, while
colored portions are labeled by metabolite pathway name and frequency.
b Volcano plot of metabolites based on differential abundance (logFC>1 in red,
logFC < −1 in blue) at R + 1 vs. Preﬂight. Labeled points are differentially abundant
metabolites with connections to spaceﬂight-related anemia, inﬂammation, and
oxidative stress. c Box plots of the scaled abundance of select differentially abun-
dant metabolites associated with purine metabolism, glycerophospholipid meta-
bolism, and anemia and hemolysis. Data represents n = 4 astronauts averaged at the
indicated condition with one technical replicate per astronaut at each timepoint.
Boxes show the quartiles of the dataset while the whiskers extend to show the rest
of the distribution except for outliers. d Diagram of the sphingomyelin cycle, which
is enriched in spaceﬂight-affected metabolites. Annotation boxes represent meta-
bolites signiﬁcantly changed at R + 1 vs. Preﬂight, with increased abundance indi-
cated in red, decreased abundance in blue, and no signiﬁcant change in gray
(only boxed metabolites were measured). The dashed boxes indicate signiﬁcant
changes in some, but not all, chain lengths of the indicated lipid species. e Violin
plots showing the results of Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) assay
performed on astronaut plasma. Repeated measures one-way ANOVA was per-
formed to assess signiﬁcance. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
6

including
SANS,
body
ﬂuid
shift,
neuroinﬂammation,
and
neurodegeneration12,72–74. In addition, an increasing body of evidence
suggests that the spaceﬂight environment could induce blood-brain
barrier (BBB) disruption72,75–78. For example, EVP proteomic proﬁles of
NASA Twins study obtained three years post-return from a year-long
ﬂight revealed brain-associated proteins in the plasma of the astronaut
twin, but not the ground control twin15.
Since EVPs are known to be released from distalorgans such as the
brain, and could be detected in plasma, we examined post-spaceﬂight
EVPs for any enrichment of brain-speciﬁc or brain-associated proteins.
Indeed, both EVPs and plasma DAPs were enriched for brain function
and brain injury-related pathways (Fig. 5a), including neurodegenera-
tion pathways, neuron death, and amyloid ﬁbril formation. Moreover,
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) analysis revealed that brain-
b. 
-3.47
3.47
0
log2 fold change
Metabolites
Proteins
Positive correlation
Negative correlation
c. 
PC(38:3)
SM(d30:1)
PC(34:3)
115.027@1.04_ANPNEG
LysoPC(20:0)
Hypoxanthine
LysoPC(18:3)
PI(36:5)
Taurine
PC (35:3) [M+H]+
Thiamine (Vit B1)
PON1
PC(30:0))
KLKB1
4-Aminobutanoate (GABA)
C8B
PC(34:0)
PROS1
LysoPC(16:1)
C1QA
Sphingosine 1-phosphate
C1QC
PC(34:5)
C1QB
LysoPC(20:1)
C4BPA
PS(16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z))
APOD
Inosine
CD5L
LysoPC(P-18:1)
PC(40:7)
LysoPC(18:1)
LysoPC(20:2)
LysoPC(18:0)
Methionine Lactamide
LysoPC(20:3)
Protoporphyrin
PC (38:3) [M+H]+
SM (d36:0) [M+H]+
SM (d36:3) [M+H]+
LPA(18:1)[M-H]-
UDP
PC(42:6)
PC(32:2)
Pimelic Acid
LysoPC(16:0)
Pyruvate
PC(36:6)
LysoPC(15:0)
LysoPC(17:0)
Dihydroorotic Acid
Dehydroascorbic Acid
PC(P-40:3)
1-Methylguanine
Purine
d.
Hypoxanthine
Inosine
PS(16:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z))
Pyruvate
115.027@1.04_ANPNEG
Sphingosine 1-phosphate
SM (d36:0) [M+H]+
LysoPC(18:0)
LysoPC(20:0)
LysoPC(20:2)
LysoPC(20:1)
6-Phosphogluconic Acid
SM (d36:1) [M+H]+
LPA(18:1)[M-H]-
PC(38:7)
Dihydroorotic Acid
Methionine Lactamide
2-Ketoisovaleric acid
SM (d36:3) [M+H]+
Taurine
CAT
PRDX1
PRDX2
PRDX6
SOD1
GCLC
Peroxiredoxins
Antioxidant enyzmes
Antioxidant metabolites
Immune-modulatory 
neurotransmitter
Antioxidant metabolites
Protein markers 
of immune cells 
Antioxidant defenses
Immunosuppression and anti-inflammatory response
a. 
Bipartite correlation network
Fig. 3 | Integrated proteomic and metabolomic analyses reveal a common
signature of antioxidant defense and immune dysfunction. a The top (plasma)
indicates signiﬁcantly differentially abundant proteins in the plasma and EVPs from
immediate or long-term post-ﬂight or both immediate and long-term post-ﬂight
groups compared to ground controls. Antioxidant proteins are white-colored, and
proteins involved in mitochondrial metabolism are orange. The purple edges
represent upregulated proteins, and the green edges represent downregulated
proteins. The lower panel (inside the cell) shows the antioxidant and mitochondrial
metabolism protein functions within the cell. b Overview of the bipartite correla-
tion network with proteins and metabolites as nodes. Ellipses depict proteins, and
metabolites are represented by square nodes. The edges indicate signiﬁcant cor-
relations between the nodes. A solid line indicates a positive correlation, while a
dotted line indicates a negative correlation. Nodes are colored based on log2-fold
changes immediately post-ﬂight compared to pre-ﬂight time points. c The anti-
oxidant defense subnetwork is enriched in peroxidases, antioxidant enzymes, and
antioxidant molecules, indicating activation of extensive antioxidant response.
d The immunosuppression and anti-inﬂammatory response subnetwork is enriched
in anti-inﬂammatory molecules and protein markers of immune cells that lower
post-ﬂight, indicating a deregulated immune response. Source data are provided as
a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
7

Enriched in
Pathway
Timepoint
L-92;L-44;L-3
R+1
Cell type
PBMC
T
B
NK
Mono
DC
Pathway
Coagulation
Immune
Lipid metabolism
Oxidative stress
Platelet activation
ROS
Enriched in
Both
EVPs
Plasma
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Timepoint
L-92;L-44;L-3
R+1
R+45;R+82
Short-term post (SP)
Short-term post (SP)
Long-term post (LP)
Long-term post (LP)
DC
DC
Mono
Mono
NK
NK
B
T
PBMC
PBMC
EVPs
EVPs
29034
1131 273
163
120
55
38
0
  PBMCs
  PBMCs
      T
      T
      B
      B
     NK
     NK
   Mono
   Mono
     DC
     DC
   EVPs
   EVPs
 Plasma
 Plasma
Total number
Genes
Genes
detected
detected
Proteins
Proteins
detected
detected
Overlapping DEG/DAPs
Overlapping DEG/DAPs
GOBP_ACTIVATION_OF_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_ANTIMICROBIAL_HUMORAL_RESPONSE
GOBP_B_CELL_MEDIATED_IMMUNITY
GOBP_BIOLOGICAL_PROCESS_INVOLVED_IN_SYMBIOTIC_INTERACTION
GOBP_CELLULAR_RESPONSE_TO_REACTIVE_OXYGEN_SPECIES
GOBP_COAGULATION
GOBP_GRANULOCYTE_MIGRATION
GOBP_HUMORAL_IMMUNE_RESPONSE
GOBP_HYDROGEN_PEROXIDE_METABOLIC_PROCESS
GOBP_LEUKOCYTE_MIGRATION
GOBP_LYMPHOCYTE_MEDIATED_IMMUNITY
GOBP_MACROPHAGE_CHEMOTAXIS
GOBP_MACROPHAGE_DIFFERENTIATION
GOBP_NEGATIVE_REGULATION_OF_CHEMOTAXIS
GOBP_NEGATIVE_REGULATION_OF_IMMUNE_SYSTEM_PROCESS
GOBP_RESPONE_TO_MOLECULE_OF_BACTERIAL_ORIGIN
GOBP_NEUTROPHIL_CHEMOTAXIS
GOBP_PLATELET_ACTIVATION
GOBP_POSITIVE_REGULATION_OF_CYTOKINE_PRODUCTION
GOBP_POSITIVE_REGULATION_OF_INFLAMMATORY_RESPONSE
GOBP_REGULATION_OF_HYDROGEN_PEROXIDE_METABOLIC_PROCESS
GOBP_REGULATION_OF_LIPID_TRANSPORT
GOBP_RESPONSE_OF_CHEMOKINE
GOBP_RESPONSE_OF_CHEMOKINE
GOBP_RESPONE_TO_OXIDATIVE_STRESS
GOBP_RESPONE_TO_REACTIVATE_OXYGEN_SPECIES
d
a
Significantly up
Significantly down
Not significant
10000
20000
30000
0
30000
  0
50
100
150
c
Gene number
b
Significantly up
Not significant
Significantly down
Significantly up
Not significant
Significantly down
e
Plasma
Plasma
Fig. 4 | Immune cells contribute to the observed secretome changes after
spaceﬂight. a Upset plot of identiﬁed genes in PBMC and identiﬁed proteins in
EVPs and plasma. b Overlap of immune cell DEGs, plasma DAPs, and EVP daps. Up-
regulated genes/proteins (Immune cells: p-value < 0.05, secretome: adjusted p-
value < 0.05, fold change > 0) are depicted in orange. Down-regulated genes/pro-
teins (Immune cells: p-value < 0.05, secretome: adjusted p-value < 0.05, fold change
<0) are depicted in colored purple. Non-signiﬁcant genes/proteins are depicted in
colored gray. Wilcoxon rank sum tests were performed. c Expression of secretome
DAPs in immune cells. d Fold change (R + 1/pre-ﬂight) of the selected secretome-
enriched pathways normalized score in immune cells. Among the secretome-
enriched pathways, immune function, oxidative stress, antioxidant, lipid metabo-
lism, coagulation, and platelet activation pathways were selected. e MACSPlex
analysis of immune marker expression in EVPs. Source data are provided as a
Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
8

associated proteins were increased in plasma at R + 1 (Fig. 5b), which
matches orthogonal data from a JAXA cfRNA-seq study that also
revealed an increase in brain-enriched proteins immediately post-ﬂight
(R + 3) (Fig. 5c) (study OSD-530 of 6 Japanese astronauts on the Inter-
national Space Station, ISS). Of note, the spike in brain signatures for
plasma, cfRNA, and exosome proteins was most pronounced in the
days after landing back on Earth (R + 1 and R + 3) (Fig. 5d).
To examine possible sources of spaceﬂight-associated brain sig-
natures in plasma, two hypotheses were examined: (1) proteins are
purposely packaged and shuttled from the brain into EVPs and
released or (2) BBB integrity is disrupted, indicating “leakiness” of
brain proteins. To address the ﬁrst hypothesis, we examined EVP
protein cargo data in 13 mouse tissues from a public EVP atlas25 (blood,
thymus, lymph node (LN), brown adipose tissue (BAT), bone, brain,
c
d
a
b
SEMA7A
SNCA
SVIP
YWHAG
YWHAH
GNG5
GPX1
NRGN
PRKACA
RAP2A
CAT
CNP
EPB41
EPB41L2
GDI1
e
Pathway name
Scaled abundance in EVPs 
Plasma
EVPs
z-score
Timepoints:
Timepoints:
Astronauts:
Astronauts:
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
9

heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleen, white adipose tissue, and muscle). Of
the 16 brain-annotated proteins, 3 were brain-exclusive (CNP, EP41,
NRGN), 2 were highly enriched in the brain (Epb4L1 and PRKACA), and
ﬁve others were highest in the liver. However, SNCA, semaphorin 7 A
(SEMA7A), and small VCP-interacting protein (SVIP) were not detected
in mouse brain EVPs, nor in other tissues (Fig. 5e), indicating that
packaging of these proteins into EVPs is unlikely, given their absence in
the murine brain tissue.
To test the alternative hypothesis of BBB disruption, we examined
the expression of biomarkers previously associated with BBB integrity,
speciﬁcally S100 calcium binding protein B (S100B), Enolase 2 (ENO2)
and Platelet Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule (PECAM-1)79,80
(Fig. 6a, b). While the proteins ENO2 and S100B showed no signiﬁcant
difference for pre/post-ﬂight, PECAM-1 showed an increase in the
plasma protein abundance at R + 1 in C001, C003, and C004, and a
postﬂight increase as well when measured at R + 45 and R + 82
(Wilcoxson rank sum, p = 0.07)(Fig. 6a). To further examine the in vivo
changes in PECAM-1, we used brain tissue from rodents ﬂown on the
RR-18 mission, which spent 35 days on the ISS. After spaceﬂight, the
RR-18 rodents were returned to Earth, wherein the ﬂight samples (FLT)
were dissected and ﬁxed onto slides for straining at the same time as
the ground controls (GC). Interestingly, signiﬁcantly increased PECAM-
1 immunoreactivity (n = 5 replicates, two-sided Student’s paired t-Test,
p = 0.023) was detected in the FLT samples relative to the GC group
(Fig. 6b), implicating PECAM-1 as a possible spaceﬂight-related marker
for BBB integrity.
Discussion
Secretome proﬁling of the i4 crew after a 3-day spaceﬂight revealed
signiﬁcant changes in oxidative stress, brain homeostasis, and coagu-
lation markers. These changes largely recovered post-spaceﬂight,
although some proteins (particularly in plasma) still remained
Fig. 5 | Brain-related proteins are enriched in the secretome after spaceﬂight.
a Overrepresentation analysis of signiﬁcantly enriched pathways (adjusted p-
value < 0.05) related to brain function and injury of EVPs and plasma DAPs at R + 1
(adjusted p-value < 0.05, Left: EVP, Right: plasma). b Gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) of EVP DAPs immediately post-ﬂight and long-term post-ﬂight based on the
tissue-enriched database derived from the Human Protein Atlas database. GSEA
was performed with fgsea::fgsea() using minSize=5 and maxSize = 500 as para-
meters. Signiﬁcant results (adjusted p-value < 0.1) are shown. c Gene set enrich-
ment analysis of cfRNA measured immediately post-ﬂight JAXA CFE mission based
on the tissue-enriched database derived from the Human Protein Atlas database.
GSEA was performed with fgsea::fgsea() using minSize = 5 and maxSize = 500 as
parameters. Signiﬁcant results (adjusted p-value < 0.1) are shown. d Abundance of
brain-enriched proteins in EVPs. Data is from n = 4 astronauts, representing one
technical replicate per astronaut and timepoint averaged at the indicated condition
(preﬂight, and long-term postﬂight). Boxes show the quartiles of the dataset while
the whiskers extend to show the rest of the distribution except for “outliers”.
Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. e Abundance of brain-enriched
proteins in EVPs isolated from naive, ground control mice.
b
Ground Control (GC)
Ground Control (GC)
Flight (FLT)
Flight (FLT)
Merged
PECAM-1
DAPI
LECTIN
a
S100B
PECAM1
ENO2
Scaled abundance in i4 plasma 
Timepoints:
Timepoints:
Astronauts:
Astronauts:
Fig. 6 | Blood Brain Barrier integrity markers in spaceﬂight. a Abundance of
blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity peptides in plasma of i4 astronauts shown as
violin plots. Data is from n = 4 astronauts. Each blood proteomic measurement was
performed in two technical replicates per astronaut and timepoint. Displayed data
represents the average of the technical replicates which were further averaged at
the indicated condition (preﬂight, and long-term postﬂight). Boxes show the
quartiles of the dataset while the whiskers extend to show the rest of the dis-
tribution except for “outliers”. b Representative images of hippocampal PECAM-1 in
the ﬂight (FLT) and ground control (GC) mice (n = 5). PECAM-1 positive cells were
identiﬁed based on red ﬂuorescence, while endothelium was stained with lectin
(green). The nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). In the control hippo-
campal region, few positive cells were found. In the hippocampal region of FLT
mice, enhanced PECAM expression could be detected. There was a signiﬁcant
difference between FLT and GC groups with p < 0.05 (n = 5 replicates, two-sided
Student’s paired t-Test, p = 0.023).Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Scale bar = 50 mm.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
10

differentially abundant six months later. Although this study focuses
on a short-term mission, our ﬁndings recapitulate several of the
responses observed in the NASA Twins study including anemia, coa-
gulation, and oxidative stress, as well as spaceﬂight-associated brain
homeostasis alterations15,22, which indicate recurrent biological per-
turbations relevant for future crews and missions. Multiple studies
have reported a higher risk of developing internal jugular vein
thrombosis in the ISS crews than the general population, a condition
that may lead to pulmonary embolism and long-term morbidity13,14,81.
Fortunately, the overall risk of spaceﬂight-induced clotting
returns to baseline upon landing, as indicated by normal levels of pro-
thrombotic factors PF4 and PF4V1 in EVPs and plasma collected 82
days post-ﬂight13,14. Most metabolic alterations induced by spaceﬂight
were also temporary, with metabolic proﬁles rapidly returning to their
pre-ﬂight states upon return to Earth. Nonetheless, the 100 speciﬁc
altered metabolites from spaceﬂight showed enrichment for oxidative
stress, hemolysis, lipid peroxidation, and immune suppression path-
ways. These pathways included metabolites that have appeared in a
previous study (the Soyuz-36-Salyut-6-Soyuz-35 mission), such as
1-methylinosine82. A 45-day head-down tilt study showed dynamic
changes in taurine, glycine, betaine, creatine, and glutamine83, which
also mirrored results in mice84, and taurine and inosine demonstrated
correlations with several antioxidant enzymes.
Indeed, in our proteomics data, we observed upregulation of
several antioxidant proteins such as PRDX2, SOD2, CAT, and GPX1.
PRDX2 increased in all crew members immediately post-ﬂight (R + 1),
while PRDX6 and SOD2 were decreased, and 2 proteoforms of catalase
were increased in one crewmember after landing. A spaceﬂight mouse
study also observed PRDX6 and catalase gene upregulation in skin
samples85, while a tail suspension rat study observed upregulation of
PRDX6 in the hippocampus86. Additional rodent studies have also
shown changes in oxidative stress proteins (SOD1, SOD2, Xanthine
oxidase, etc.) resulting from spaceﬂight factor exposure, both post-
exposure and longterm86,87. Thus, we propose that the oxidative stress
induced by spaceﬂight triggers the production of both proteins and
metabolites with antioxidant functions. Signs of hemolysis were also
evident, underscored by an increase in circulating protoporphyrin, a
known marker of this process. The observed decrease in S1P plasma
abundance could also signal a reduction in erythrocytes, cells
responsible for maintaining S1P concentrations in the blood. Our data
further indicated lipid peroxidation, a biochemical process known to
disrupt cellular membrane stability and decrease cell viability. Com-
plementing these ﬁndings, we found an enrichment in anemia-related
genes in our whole blood transcriptomics data and signs of coagula-
tion dysregulation, often associated with anemia, in both EVPs and
plasma proteomics. Indeed, spaceﬂight anemia has been previously
observed and reported, consistent with our observations87. Lastly,
evidence of immune suppression was apparent. Aside from their roles
as antioxidants, inosine and taurine possess immunoprotective prop-
erties. Along with the immunomodulatory metabolite GABA, these
metabolites correlated with immune cell markers. Given that the
abundance of these immune cell markers was low while immune
modulatory metabolites were in high abundance, we hypothesize an
activation of immunosuppression and anti-inﬂammatory responses
after inﬂammation during the ﬂight88.
Our analysis of the i4 crew revealed a notable increase in several
brain-associated proteins within both plasma and EVPs following
spaceﬂight. Notably, SNCA was signiﬁcantly increased in plasma, EVPs,
and several immune cell types immediately after spaceﬂight, sug-
gesting it represents a common protein marker of response to
spaceﬂight. SNCA is associated with Parkinson’s disease, and elevated
levels have been linked to brain dysfunction and neurodegenerative
disorders like Parkinson’s disease89. Therefore, understanding these
protein changes can guide the development of targeted therapeutic
strategies for managing neurodegenerative diseases in space and on
Earth. However, further investigations are necessary to better under-
stand the precise mechanisms and implications of changes in brain-
associated proteins as well as means to modify their levels safely.
Although these brain-associated proteins suggest some dysregu-
lation of homeostasis in the brain, none of these proteins are unique to
the brain, and thus it is possible that they may originate from other
organs. Correlations between expression of these proteins in the brain
and in the blood in response to spaceﬂight is required to conﬁrm
whether increased levels reﬂect dysregulation in the brain. However, a
similar increase in brain-enriched transcripts/proteins was observed in
JAXA Cell free epigenome (CFE) cfRNA (more than 120 days on the ISS),
and the NASA Twins study EVP proteome, (1-year on the ISS) in-ﬂight
and immediately post-ﬂight. We note that the amplitude and durability
of changes in brain homeostasis and potential BBB disruption/neu-
roinﬂammation may be dictated by the length of time spent in space or
distance from Earth. Previous reports of space ﬂown mice on brain
state have shown decreased brain derived neurotrophic factor,
induced neuron atrophy in the cerebral cortex, and overall oxidative
stress, regulated partially through c-Jun/c-Fos90. Moreover, a recent
MRI-based study of astronaut brains found that spaceﬂight induced
ventricular expansion in the brain91. Finally, increased hippocampal
apoptosis and aquaporin-4 expression have been observed in other
studies75, along with signiﬁcant increase in the expression of PECAM-1
and decreases in the BBB-related tight junction protein, Zonula
occludens-1 (ZO-1). Given the murine and human data observed to
date, as well as data from this paper, PECAM-1 is a strong candidate as a
BBB biomarker that could be measured in upcoming missions.
Overall, secretome proﬁling provides a minimally invasive, yet
comprehensive approach to monitor crew health and physiology. Based
on this work and follow-up studies, we propose to develop a liquid
biopsy and biomarker panel to monitor space-associated health risk and
link these to long-term work on countermeasures. Eventually such tools
can generate reliable markers in response to spaceﬂight for more
diverse populations (age, sex, health, background). Due to the limitation
of the Dragon capsule equipment, we were unable to obtain in-ﬂight
secretome data for the i4 study, which would also be critical to study in
the future. Additionally, creating more proﬁles from other crews and
controls will help build a larger, more informative cohort, and further
buttress and give context to the results seen in these data. Nonetheless,
as human spaceﬂight becomes more prevalent, the necessity for deep
secretome proﬁling can help establish baseline proﬁles for safer human
space travel increases, and these tools can be part of the armamentar-
ium of biomedical tools to help keep crews safe for upcoming,
exploration-class missions, as well as continued health on Earth.
Methods
Blood pre-processing and EVP (extracellular vesicle and parti-
cle) isolation
Detailed descriptions of the methods pertaining to all proteomics/
metabolomics/transcriptomics assays mentioned in this paper can be
found in the “protocol” section of the GeneLab OSDR links found
below92. Brieﬂy, blood was collected in K2 EDTA tube(s) and shipped
overnight on ice. Plasma was isolated by differential centrifugation at
500 x g for 10 minutes and 3000 x g for 20 min as previously described
in refs. 24,93. The supernatant was collected and aliquoted for long-
term storage at −80 °C and for EVP isolation. Plasma EVPs were isolated
by sequential ultracentrifugation, as previously described in refs. 25.
EVP protein concentration was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
protein assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).
Additional sample collection methods and data generation have
been also detailed in the protocols paper24.
Plasma proteomic proﬁling
Detailed methods for proteomic, metabolic and transcriptomic pro-
ﬁling are described in Overbey et al. 2024. Brieﬂy, plasma was isolated
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
11

from cell preparation tubes (CPTs) and processed with Seer’s Proteo-
graph Analysis Suite23. Seer’s standard 5-nanoparticle (5-NP) panel was
used to enrich low abundance proteins followed by LC-MS/MS pro-
teomics analysis in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The list
of differentially abundant proteins from the I4-FP1 and I4-FP4 plasma
proteomics dataset in Overbey et al. 2024 was ﬁltered for differentially
expressed genes that had an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and |logFC | > 192.
Extracellular vesicles and particle (EVP) proteomic proﬁling
EVP proteomic proﬁling was described in Overbey et al. 202492. Brieﬂy,
plasma samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 20 minutes and
then EVPs were collected by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for
70 min. EVPs were then washed in PBS and again collected by ultra-
centrifugation at 100,000 x g for 70 min. The ﬁnal EVP pellet was
resuspended in PBS. Two micrograms of enriched EVPs were digested
and analyzed with LC-MS/MS in data-dependent acquisition (DDA)
mode. The list of differentially abundant proteins from the I4-FP1 and
I4-FP4 plasma proteomics dataset in Overbey et al. was ﬁltered for
differentially expressed genes that had an adjusted p-value < 0.05 and |
logFC | > 192.
Plasma metabolite proﬁling
Plasma metabolite proﬁling was described in Overbey et al. 202493.
Brieﬂy, plasma metabolites were isolated using a combination of
aqueous normal phase (ANP) and reverse phase (RP) chromatographic
separations and analyzed by positive- and negative-ion MS. Metabo-
lites were annotated using an in-house metabolite database compris-
ing 865 metabolites for ANP chromatography and a 270 lipid
metabolite RP database, curated from the Agilent plasma lipidomic
database. All metabolites identiﬁed are level 1. Namely, to be identiﬁed,
the feature’s mass, chromatographic retention time (RT) and MS/MS
fragmentation pattern had to match to measurements acquired from
the analysis of a pure chemical reference standard in our lab’s in-house
metabolite database. The list of differentially abundant metabolites
from the I4-FP1 and I4-FP4 plasma proteomics dataset in Overbey et al.
2024 was ﬁltered for differentially expressed genes that had an
adjusted p-value < 0.05 and |logFC | > 193.
Western blot validation of EVP markers
We validated DEPs in human plasma-derived EVPs by immunoblotting.
For this, 5 µg of EVP protein were subjected to denaturing electro-
phoresis (SDS-PAGE), transferred onto a PVDF membrane and incu-
bated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against human
Galectin3 Binding Protein (LGALS3BP) (mousemonoclonal IgG, 1:1000
dilution, sc-374541, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and Ficolin-3 (FCN3)
(rabbit polyclonal IgG, 1:500 dilution, 11867-AP, Proteintech). Sec-
ondary antibodies used were horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled
IgG goat anti-rabbit or goat anti-mouse (1 h incubation, 1:5000 dilu-
tion, Jackson Laboratory). All antibodies were diluted in 5% BSA in Tris-
buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The
immunocomplexes were developed using the SuperSignal™Western
Blot Enhancer (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and the membranes
were imaged using a ChemiDoc Imaging System (Bio-Rad).
ELISA validation of plasma markers
PF4 concentration in EVP-rich plasma (post-3000 x g spin) and EVP-
depleted plasma (CPT tubes, see proteomic mass spectrometry ana-
lysis) was assayed with a PF4 ELISA kit (R&D, cat #DPF40) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.
Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) assay
To assess the lipid peroxidation in plasma, we measured the levels of
TBARS as by-products of lipid peroxidation using the Lipid Peroxida-
tion (MDA) Assay Kit (Abcam, ab118970), according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions. For this assay, 10 µl of plasma were used for
generating malondialdehyde (MDA) adducts with thiobarbituric acid
(TBA) which were further quantiﬁed ﬂuorometrically (Ex/Em = 532/
553) against a standard curve ranging between 0-0.5 nmol TBARS/well.
Data were analyzed according to the manufacturer instructions taking
into consideration the plasma volume used for the assay and results
were reported as µM TBARS. Repeated measures one-way ANOVA was
performed to assess signiﬁcance.
Multiplex bead-based characterization/proﬁling of plasma EVPs
by ﬂow cytometry
The relative abundance of speciﬁc, immune-related plasma EVP pro-
teins, plasma EVPs enriched by sequential ultracentrifugation (1 µg of
EVP protein) were characterized using the MACSPlex Exosome Kit
(Miltenyi Biotec, 130-108-813) according to the manufacturer instruc-
tions for overnight protocol for 1.5 ml reagent tubes. Data was
acquired on a Cytek Aurora-5 (Cytek Biosciences, USA) instrument and
analyzed using the FlowJo™v10.8 Software (BD Biosciences). The
relative abundance (represented as MFI) for each EVP epitope was
normalized against the mIgG and the average MFI of EV markers (CD9,
CD63, and CD81), and the results were displayed as a heatmap. Welch’s
two sample t-test were used to calculate P-value. Heatmaps were
generated using the R (v4.1.2) package pheatmap (v1.0).
Single-nuclei gene expression analysis of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells
Detailed methods for sample collection and data processing are
described in refs. 93,94. Blood samples were collected before (Pre-
launch: L-92, L-44, and L-3) and after (Return; R + 1, R + 45, and R + 82)
the spaceﬂight. Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’ v2, 10x Genomics
was used to generate single cell data from isolated PBMCs. We fol-
lowed the analysis pipeline as previously reported95. Subpopulations
were annotated based on Azimuth human PBMC reference. Gene
expression values were used to generate heatmaps. Selected pathways
were used for the ssGSEA analysis.
Direct RNA-sequencing on Oxford Nanopore Technologies
PromethION
The list of differentially expressed genes from the I4-FP1 direct RNA-
sequencing dataset in Overbey et al. 2023 (In review at Nature) was
ﬁltered for differentially expressed genes that had an adjusted p-
value < 0.05 and |logFC | > 0.5. Brieﬂy, these differentially expressed
genes were identiﬁed using Oxford Nanopore Technologies package
pipeline-transcriptome-de96. Intervene was used to identify overlaps
between differentially expressed genes and differentially abundant
proteins in EVP and plasma datasets and create the Venn diagram97.
PBMC gene expression data was obtained from the i4 PBMC single cell
data. Direct RNA-seq gene expression, proteomic abundances, and
PBMC gene expression values were normalized by pre-ﬂight values.
Overrepresentation analysis was performed with WebGestalt98.
Integration of metabolomics and proteomics
For the correlation-based network analysis, we used protein/metabo-
lite pairs that showed a signiﬁcant Spearman correlation (FDR < 5%)
across alltime points.Inthis network, proteins aredepicted by ellipses,
while metabolites are represented by square nodes. Edges between
them signify signiﬁcant correlation: a solid edge indicates a positive
correlation, and a dotted edge signiﬁes a negative one. The analysis
considered differentially abundant proteins and metabolites that
changed immediately post-ﬂight (R + 1) compared to pre-ﬂight (L-92, L-
44, L-3) to compute these correlations. Furthermore, the color of each
node reﬂects the log fold change of that node post-ﬂight (R + 1).
Spaceﬂight and Mouse Groups
Ten-week-old C57BL/6 male mice were launched in December 2021 to
the international space station (ISS) on the rodent research-18 (RR-18)
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
12

mission for 35 days. All mice were maintained at an ambient tem-
perature of 26–28 °C and humidity of 30–70% with a 12 h light/dark
cycle during the ﬂight. This hardware has a housing density that is
within the guidelines recommended by the National Institutes of
Health. All mice were provided NASA Nutrient-upgraded Rodent Food
Bar (NuRFB) and autoclaved deionized water ad libitum. Ground
control (GC) mice were maintained on Earth in the same ﬂight hard-
ware cages. Upon live return, mice were exsanguinated by closed-
cardiac blood collection under deep Ketamine/Xylazine (150/45 mg/
kg) anesthesia, followed by cervical dislocation as a secondary eutha-
nasia method to ensure death. Their brains were removed and pre-
pared
for
analysis.
The
left
hemi-brains
were
ﬁxed
in
4%
paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 24 h, and
then rinsed with PBS for immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays. The right
hemi-brains were ﬂash-frozen and stored at −80 °C for further analysis.
GC mice were euthanized three days later. Animal experiments were
approved by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) on October 14, 2021
(Protocol Number: RR-18), Roskamp Institute IACUC on October 7,
2021 (Protocol Number RR-18).
Immunostaining assays for PECAM-1
Brain sections were immunoﬂuorescence stained against PECAM-1, a
biomarker related to BBB. Six µm sections were deparafﬁnized, rehy-
drated and washed in PBS for 20 min. Vascular network was labeled
with DyLight® 488 Lycopersicon Esculentum (Tomato) Lectin (1:100,
Vector Laboratories) for 30 min at room temperature followed by
10 min wash in PBS. Sections were then incubated overnight at 4 °C
with primary rabbit antibodies PECAM-1 (1:100, NB100-2284, Novus
Biologicals, Centennial, CO). After 3 washes in PBS, sections were
incubated for 1.5 h with secondary antibody goat anti-rabbit IgG Alexa
Fluor® 568 (1:1000 in antibody dilution buffer; Life Technologies). The
cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI solution (Life Technologies)
and coverslipped with Vectashield® HardSet mounting medium (Vec-
tor Laboratories). Six to 10 ﬁeld images were captured with a BZ-X700
inverted ﬂuorescence microscope (Keyence Corp.) at 20X magniﬁca-
tion spanning the entire brain sections.
Mouse Tissue EVP isolation and proteomic analysis
Tissues were isolated from 6 to 8 week-old naive female C57BL/6 mice
and processed as previously described in ref. 25. EVPs were isolated
and unbiased proteomic proﬁling of EVP cargo was performed as
described above. Mouse studies were performed in accordance with
institutional, IACUC and AAALAS guidelines, and according to Weill
Cornell Medicine animal protocol #0709-666 A.
Tissue of origin deconvolution analysis
To perform tissue of origin deconvolution, a list of proteins “enriched”
or “speciﬁc” to 36 different tissues compiled from the Human Protein
Atlas (https://www.proteinatlas.org/) was used as pathway input to
fgsea (version 1.22) with a minimum size=5 and maximum size=500.
The list of differentially abundant features was ranked based on the
t-statistic and used as gene list input. We have added the script used for
this analysis to the github repository.
The ﬁle corresponding to the 36 tissues was generated from the
data in the link below:
https://www.proteinatlas.org/humanproteome/tissue/tissue
+speciﬁc which include 36 tissues.
IRB statement human subjects research
All subjects were consented at an informed consent brieﬁng (ICB) at
SpaceX (Hawthorne, CA), and samples were collected and processed
under the approval of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Weill
Cornell Medicine, under Protocol 21-05023569. All crew members
have consented for data and sample sharing. Tissue samples were
provided by SpaceX Inspiration4 crew members after consent for
research use of the biopsies, swabs, and biological materials. The
procedure followed guidelines set by the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and operated under Institutional
Review Board (IRB) approved protocols. Experiments were conducted
in accordance with local regulations and with the approval of the IRB at
Weill Cornell Medicine (IRB #21-05023569).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Source data of the ﬁgures are provided with this paper. All datasets in
this paper have been deposited in the NASA Open Science Data
Repositories (OSDR; osdr.nasa.gov; comprised of GeneLab92 and the
Ames Life Sciences Data Archive [ALSDA]1,99). Identiﬁers for publicly
downloadable datasets in the OSDR are documented below. Also, data
can be visualized online through the SOMA Data Explorer (link below)
with the latest reference100. Any additional information required to
reanalyze the data reported in this work is available from the Lead
Contact upon request. For the blood plasma, the following assays are
found under OSDR identiﬁer OSD-571: Proteomics (Seer Proteograph),
proteomics of blood EVPs, plasma metabolomics data, cell-free RNA.
Direct RNA-seq from blood plasma can be found under OSDR identi-
ﬁer: OSD-569 (Supplementary Table 1) All raw data, processed data and
detailed methods are in the GeneLab OSDR links here: https://osdr.
nasa.gov/bio/repo/data/studies/OSD-569
https://osdr.nasa.gov/bio/
repo/data/studies/OSD-571 Interactive data browser for the pro-
teomics, metabolomics, and other omics data are available on the
SOMA
data
portal:
https://soma.weill.cornell.edu/apps/SOMA_
Browser/ Source data are provided with this paper.
Code availability
All code used to generate the analyses in this manuscript are available
on GitHub at https://github.com/eliah-o/inspiration4-omics.
References
1.
Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental Biological Features of Space-
ﬂight: Advancing the Field to Enable Deep-Space Exploration. Cell
183, 1162–1184 (2020).
2.
Kliuchnikova, A. A. et al. Blood Plasma Proteome: A Meta-Analysis
of the Results of Protein Quantiﬁcation in Human Blood by Tar-
geted Mass Spectrometry. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 24, 769 (2023).
3.
Brzhozovskiy, A. G. et al. The Effects of Spaceﬂight Factors on the
Human Plasma Proteome, Including Both Real Space Missions and
Ground-Based Experiments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 3194 (2019).
4.
Larina, I. M. et al. Protein expression changes caused by space-
ﬂight as measured for 18 Russian cosmonauts. Sci. Rep. 7,
8142 (2017).
5.
Martin, D., Makedonas, G., Crucian, B., Peanlikhit, T. & Rithidech, K.
The use of the multidimensional protein identiﬁcation technology
(MudPIT) to analyze plasma proteome of astronauts collected
before, during, and after spaceﬂights. Acta. Astronaut 193,
9–19 (2022).
6.
Kashirina, D. N. et al. Semiquantitative Proteomic Research of
Protein Plasma Proﬁle of Volunteers in 21-Day Head-Down Bed
Rest. Front. Physiol. 11, 678 (2020).
7.
da Silveira, W. A. et al. Comprehensive Multi-omics Analysis
Reveals Mitochondrial Stress as a Central Biological Hub for
Spaceﬂight Impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201.e20 (2020).
8.
Hoshino, A. et al. Extracellular vesicle and particle biomarkers
deﬁne multiple human cancers. Cell 182, 1044–1061.e18 (2020).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
13

9.
Liang, Y., Lehrich, B. M., Zheng, S. & Lu, M. Emerging methods in
biomarker identiﬁcation for extracellular vesicle-based liquid
biopsy. J. Extracell. Vesicles 10, e12090 (2021).
10.
Vaughn, M. N., Winston, C. N., Levin, N., Rissman, R. A. & Ris-
brough, V. B. Developing Biomarkers of Mild Traumatic Brain
Injury: Promise and Progress of CNS-Derived Exosomes. Front.
Neurol. 12, 698206 (2021).
11.
Xu, K. et al. Extracellular vesicles as potential biomarkers and
therapeutic approaches in autoimmune diseases. J. Transl. Med.
18, 432 (2020).
12.
Chakrabortty, S. K. et al. Exosome based analysis for Space
Associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome and health risks in space
exploration. NPJ Microgravity 8, 40 (2022).
13.
Limper, U. et al. The thrombotic risk of spaceﬂight: has a serious
problem been overlooked for more than half of a century? Eur.
Heart J. 42, 97–100 (2021).
14.
Auñón-Chancellor, S. M., Pattarini, J. M., Moll, S. & Sargsyan, A.
Venous Thrombosis during Spaceﬂight. N. Engl. J. Med. 382,
89–90 (2020).
15.
Bezdan, D. et al. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and Exosome Proﬁling
from a Year-Long Human Spaceﬂight Reveals Circulating Bio-
markers. iScience 23, 101844 (2020).
16.
Morukov, B. V., Nichiporuk, I. A., Tret’yakov, V. S. & Larina, I. M.
Biochemical Markers of Bone Tissue Metabolism in Cosmonauts
after a Prolonged Spaceﬂight. Hum. Physiol. 31, 684–687 (2005).
17.
Channon, M. B. et al. Using natural, stable calcium isotopes of
human blood to detect and monitor changes in bone mineral
balance. Bone 77, 69–74 (2015).
18.
Smith, J. K. IL-6 and the dysregulation of immune, bone, muscle,
and metabolic homeostasis during spaceﬂight. NPJ Microgravity
4, 24 (2018).
19.
Smith, S. M. & Heer, M. Calcium and bone metabolism during
space ﬂight. Nutrition 18, 849–852 (2002).
20.
Ferrando, A. A., Paddon-Jones, D. & Wolfe, R. R. Alterations in
protein metabolism during space ﬂight and inactivity. Nutrition 18,
837–841 (2002).
21.
Smith, S. M. Red blood cell and iron metabolism during space
ﬂight. Nutrition 18, 864–866 (2002).
22.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: A multi-
dimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science
364, eaau8650 (2019).
23.
Blume, J. E. et al. Rapid, deep and precise proﬁling of the plasma
proteome with multi-nanoparticle protein corona. Nat. Commun.
11, 3662 (2020).
24.
Overbey, E. G. et al. Collection of Biospecimens from the
Inspiration4 Mission Establishes the Standards for the Space
Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA). Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-024-48806-z (2024).
25.
Bojmar, L. et al. Extracellular vesicle and particle isolation from
human and murine cell lines, tissues, and bodily ﬂuids. STAR
Protoc. 2, 100225 (2021).
26.
Li, H., Yang, H., Wang, D., Zhang, L. & Ma, T. Peroxiredoxin2 (Prdx2)
Reduces Oxidative Stress and Apoptosis of Myocardial Cells
Induced by Acute Myocardial Infarction by Inhibiting the TLR4/
Nuclear Factor kappa B (NF-κB) Signaling Pathway. Med. Sci.
Monit. 26, e926281 (2020).
27.
Chang, C.-W., Yang, S.-Y., Yang, C.-C., Chang, C.-W. & Wu, Y.-R.
Plasma and Serum Alpha-Synuclein as a Biomarker of Diagnosis in
Patients With Parkinson’s Disease. Front. Neurol. 10, 1388 (2019).
28.
Lööv, C., Scherzer, C. R., Hyman, B. T., Breakeﬁeld, X. O. &
Ingelsson, M. α-Synuclein in Extracellular Vesicles: Functional
Implications and Diagnostic Opportunities. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol.
36, 437–448 (2016).
29.
Montoya, M. C. et al. Role of ICAM-3 in the initial interaction of T
lymphocytes and APCs. Nat. Immunol. 3, 159–168 (2002).
30.
Akimova, D. et al. Metabolite proﬁling of whole murine embryos
reveals metabolic perturbations associated with maternal
valproate-induced neural tube closure defects. Birth Defects Res.
109, 106–119 (2017).
31.
Kelesidis, T. et al. The Role of Platelet-Activating Factor in Chronic
Inﬂammation, Immune Activation, and Comorbidities Associated
with HIV Infection. AIDS Rev. 17, 191–201 (2015).
32.
Ashraf M. Z. & Srivastav, S. Oxidized phospholipids: introduction
and biological signiﬁcance. in Lipoproteins - Role in Health and
Diseases (ed. Kostner, G.) (InTech, 2012). https://doi.org/10.
5772/50461.
33.
Klein, J. Membrane breakdown in acute and chronic neurode-
generation: focus on choline-containing phospholipids. J. Neural
Transm. 107, 1027–1063 (2000).
34.
Altomare, A. et al. Lipid peroxidation derived reactive carbonyl
species in free and conjugated forms as an index of lipid perox-
idation: limits and perspectives. Redox Biol. 42, 101899 (2021).
35.
Wen, J., Yachelini, P. C., Sembaj, A., Manzur, R. E. & Garg, N. J.
Increased oxidative stress is correlated with mitochondrial dys-
function in chagasic patients. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 41, 270–276
(2006).
36.
Zhang, W., Liu, R., Chen, Y., Wang, M. & Du, J. Crosstalk between
Oxidative Stress and Exosomes. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2022,
3553617 (2022).
37.
Wallace, D. C. A mitochondrial paradigm of metabolic and
degenerative diseases, aging, and cancer: a dawn for evolutionary
medicine. Annu. Rev. Genet. 39, 359–407 (2005).
38.
Auten, R. L. & Davis, J. M. Oxygen toxicity and reactive
oxygen species: the devil is in the details. Pediatr. Res. 66, 121–127
(2009).
39.
Xia, C. et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes ameliorate
intervertebral disc degeneration via anti-oxidant and anti-
inﬂammatory effects. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 143, 1–15 (2019).
40.
Shiekh, P. A., Singh, A. & Kumar, A. Exosome laden oxygen
releasing antioxidant and antibacterial cryogel wound dressing
OxOBand alleviate diabetic and infectious wound healing. Bio-
materials 249, 120020 (2020).
41.
Yang, J. et al. Extracellular Vesicles Derived from Bone Marrow
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Protect against Experimental Colitis via
Attenuating Colon Inﬂammation, Oxidative Stress and Apoptosis.
PLoS ONE 10, e0140551 (2015).
42.
Crucian, B. et al. Incidence of clinical symptoms during long-
duration orbital spaceﬂight. Int. J. Gen. Med. 9, 383–391 (2016).
43.
Crucian, B. et al. Immune system dysregulation occurs during
short duration spaceﬂight on board the space shuttle. J. Clin.
Immunol. 33, 456–465 (2013).
44.
Pierson, D. L., Stowe, R. P., Phillips, T. M., Lugg, D. J. & Mehta, S. K.
Epstein-Barr virus shedding by astronauts during space ﬂight.
Brain Behav. Immun. 19, 235–242 (2005).
45.
Rooney, B. V., Crucian, B. E., Pierson, D. L., Laudenslager, M. L. &
Mehta, S. K. Herpes virus reactivation in astronauts during
spaceﬂight and its application on earth. Front. Microbiol. 10,
16 (2019).
46.
Mehta, S. K. et al. Multiple latent viruses reactivate in astronauts
during Space Shuttle missions. Brain Behav. Immun. 41, 210–217
(2014).
47.
Mehta, S. K., Stowe, R. P., Feiveson, A. H., Tyring, S. K. & Pierson, D.
L. Reactivation and shedding of cytomegalovirus in astronauts
during spaceﬂight. J. Infect. Dis. 182, 1761–1764 (2000).
48.
Perkins, A., Nelson, K. J., Parsonage, D., Poole, L. B. & Karplus, P. A.
Peroxiredoxins: guardians against oxidative stress and modulators
of peroxide signaling. Trends Biochem. Sci. 40, 435–445 (2015).
49.
Nandi, A., Yan, L.-J., Jana, C. K. & Das, N. Role of Catalase in Oxi-
dative Stress- and Age-Associated Degenerative Diseases. Oxid.
Med. Cell. Longev. 2019, 9613090 (2019).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
14

50.
Kerksick, C. & Willoughby, D. The antioxidant role of glutathione
and N-acetyl-cysteine supplements and exercise-induced oxida-
tive stress. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2, 38–44 (2005).
51.
Haskó, G. et al. Inosine inhibits inﬂammatory cytokine production
by a posttranscriptional mechanism and protects against
endotoxin-induced shock. J. Immunol. 164, 1013–1019 (2000).
52.
Bhattacharyya, S. et al. Oral Inosine Persistently Elevates Plasma
antioxidant capacity in Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 31,
417–421 (2016).
53.
Jin, X., Shepherd,R.K., Duling, B. R. & Linden, J. Inosine binds to A3
adenosine receptors and stimulates mast cell degranulation. J.
Clin. Invest. 100, 2849–2857 (1997).
54.
Marcinkiewicz, J. & Kontny, E. Taurine and inﬂammatory diseases.
Amino Acids 46, 7–20 (2014).
55.
Bhat, R. et al. Inhibitory role for GABA in autoimmune inﬂamma-
tion. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 2580–2585 (2010).
56.
Zhang, B. et al. B cell-derived GABA elicits IL-10+ macrophages to
limit anti-tumour immunity. Nature 599, 471–476 (2021).
57.
Mehta, S. K. et al. Reactivation of latent viruses is associated with
increased plasma cytokines in astronauts. Cytokine 61, 205–209
(2013).
58.
Escola, J. M. et al. Selective enrichment of tetraspan proteins on
the internal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes and on exo-
somes secreted by human B-lymphocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 273,
20121–20127 (1998).
59.
Campos-Silva, C. et al. High sensitivity detection of extracellular
vesicles immune-captured from urine by conventional ﬂow cyto-
metry. Sci. Rep. 9, 2042 (2019).
60.
Togarrati, P. P., Dinglasan, N., Desai, S., Ryan, W. R. & Muench, M.
O. CD29 is highly expressed on epithelial, myoepithelial, and
mesenchymal stromal cells of human salivary glands. Oral. Dis.
24, 561–572 (2018).
61.
Cibrián, D. & Sánchez-Madrid, F. CD69: from activation marker to
metabolic gatekeeper. Eur. J. Immunol. 47, 946–953 (2017).
62.
Wang, Y. et al. Pulmonary alveolar type I cell population consists
of two distinct subtypes that differ in cell fate. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 115, 2407–2412 (2018).
63.
Matsuda, T. et al. Expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase genes,
Ror1 and Ror2, during mouse development. Mech. Dev. 105,
153–156 (2001).
64.
Borcherding, N., Kusner, D., Liu, G.-H. & Zhang, W. ROR1, an
embryonic protein with an emerging role in cancer biology. Pro-
tein Cell 5, 496–502 (2014).
65.
Legg, J., Jensen, U. B., Broad, S., Leigh, I. & Watt, F. M. Role of
melanoma chondroitin sulphate proteoglycan in patterning stem
cells in human interfollicular epidermis. Development 130,
6049–6063 (2003).
66.
de Bruyn, M. et al. Melanoma-associated Chondroitin Sulfate
Proteoglycan (MCSP)-targeted delivery of soluble TRAIL potently
inhibits melanoma outgrowth in vitro and in vivo. Mol. Cancer 9,
301 (2010).
67.
Yang, H., Parkhouse, R. M. E. & Wileman, T. Monoclonal antibodies
that identify the CD3 molecules expressed speciﬁcally at the
surface of porcine gammadelta-T cells. Immunology 115, 189–196
(2005).
68.
Pols, M. S. & Klumperman, J. Trafﬁcking and function of the tet-
raspanin CD63. Exp. Cell Res. 315, 1584–1592 (2009).
69.
Fang, X., Zheng, P., Tang, J. & Liu, Y. CD24: from A to Z. Cell. Mol.
Immunol. 7, 100–103 (2010).
70.
Heger, L. et al. Subsets of cd1c+ dcs: dendritic cell versus mono-
cyte lineage. Front. Immunol. 11, 559166 (2020).
71.
Blase, L., Daniel, P. T., Koretz, K., Schwartz-Albiez, R. & Möller, P.
The capacity of human malignant B-lymphocytes to disseminate
in SCID mice is correlated with functional expression of the
ﬁbronectin receptor alpha 5 beta 1 (CD49e/CD29). Int. J. Cancer
60, 860–866 (1995).
72.
Gupta, U., Baig, S., Majid, A. & Bell, S. M. The neurology of space
ﬂight; How does space ﬂight effect the human nervous system.
Life Sci. Space Res. (Amst) 36, 105–115 (2023).
73.
Lee, A. G. et al. Spaceﬂight associated neuro-ocular syndrome
(SANS) and the neuro-ophthalmologic effects of microgravity: a
review and an update. NPJ Microgravity 6, 7 (2020).
74.
Zhao, S. et al. Possible role of a dual regulator of neuroin-
ﬂammation and autophagy in a simulated space environment.
Acta Astronaut 187, 181–189 (2021).
75.
Mao, X. W. et al. Spaceﬂight induces oxidative damage to blood-
brain barrier integrity in a mouse model. FASEB J. 34, 15516–15530
(2020).
76.
Bellone, J. A., Gifford, P. S., Nishiyama, N. C., Hartman, R. E. & Mao,
X. W. Long-term effects of simulated microgravity and/or chronic
exposure to low-dose gamma radiation on behavior and blood-
brain barrier integrity. NPJ Microgravity 2, 16019 (2016).
77.
Zu Eulenburg, P. et al. Changes in Blood Biomarkers of Brain Injury
and Degeneration Following Long-Duration Spaceﬂight. JAMA
Neurol. 78, 1525–1527 (2021).
78.
Amselem, S. & Eyal, S. The Blood-Brain Barrier in Space:
Implications for Space Travelers and for Human Health on
Earth. Front. Drug. Deliv. 2, https://doi.org/10.3389/fddev.2022.
931221 (2022).
79.
Marchi, N. et al. Peripheral markers of brain damage and blood-
brain barrier dysfunction. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 21, 109–121
(2003).
80.
Kang, C. et al. Blood-brain barrier disruption as a cause of various
serum neuron-speciﬁc enolase cut-off values for neurological
prognosis in cardiac arrest patients. Sci. Rep. 12, 2186 (2022).
81.
Marshall-Goebel, K. et al. Assessment of jugular venous blood
ﬂow stasis and thrombosis during spaceﬂight. JAMA Netw. Open
2, e1915011 (2019).
82.
Szabó, L. D., Keresztes, P., Pallos, J. P., Csató, E. & Predmerszky, T.
Study of nucleic acid metabolism in two astronauts. Adv. Space
Res. 4, 15–18 (1984).
83.
Chen, P. et al. Human metabolic responses to microgravity
simulated in a 45-day 6° head-down tilt bed rest (HDBR) experi-
ment. Anal. Methods 8, 4334–4344 (2016).
84.
Kurosawa, R. et al. Impact of spaceﬂight and artiﬁcial gravity on
sulfur metabolism in mouse liver: sulfur metabolomic and tran-
scriptomic analysis. Sci. Rep. 11, 21786 (2021).
85.
Mao, X. W. et al. Biological and metabolic response in STS-135
space-ﬂown mouse skin. Free Radic. Res. 48, 890–897 (2014).
86.
Wang, Y. et al. Effect of Prolonged Simulated Microgravity on
Metabolic Proteins in Rat Hippocampus: Steps toward Safe Space
Travel. J. Proteome Res. 15, 29–37 (2016).
87.
Ghosh, P. et al. Effects of High-LET Radiation Exposure and Hin-
dlimb Unloading on Skeletal Muscle Resistance Artery Vasomotor
Properties and Cancellous Bone Microarchitecture in Mice. Radiat.
Res. 185, 257–266 (2016).
88.
Dickerson, B. L., Sowinski, R., Kreider, R. B. & Wu, G. Impacts of
microgravity on amino acid metabolism during spaceﬂight. Exp.
Biol. Med, (Maywood) https://doi.org/10.1177/
15353702221139189 (2023).
89.
Siddiqui, I. J., Pervaiz, N. & Abbasi, A. A. The Parkinson Disease
gene SNCA: Evolutionary and structural insights with pathological
implication. Sci. Rep. 6, 24475 (2016).
90.
Chen, B. et al. The impacts of simulated microgravity on rat brain
depended on durations and regions. Biomed. Environ. Sci. 32,
496–507 (2019).
91.
McGregor, H. R. et al. Impacts of spaceﬂight experience on human
brain structure. Sci. Rep. 13, 7878 (2023).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
15

92.
Berrios, D. C., Galazka, J., Grigorev, K., Gebre, S. & Costes, S. V.
NASA GeneLab: interfaces for the exploration of space omics
data. Nucleic Acids Res 49, D1515–D1522 (2021).
93.
Overbey, E. G. The space omics and medical atlas and interna-
tional astronaut biobank. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
024-07639-y (2024).
94.
Kim, J. et al. Single-cell multi-ome and immune proﬁles of the
Inspiration4 crew reveal conserved, cell-type, and sex-speciﬁc
responses to spaceﬂight. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-
49211-2 (2023).
95.
Barisic, D. et al. ARID1A orchestrates SWI/SNF-mediated sequen-
tial binding of transcription factors with ARID1A loss driving pre-
memory B cell fate and lymphomagenesis. Cancer Cell 42,
583–604.e11 (2024).
96.
Love, M. I., Soneson, C. & Patro, R. Swimming downstream: sta-
tistical analysis of differential transcript usage following Salmon
quantiﬁcation. [version 3; peer review: 3 approved]. F1000Res. 7,
952 (2018).
97.
Khan, A. & Mathelier, A. Intervene: a tool for intersection and
visualization of multiple gene or genomic region sets. BMC
Bioinforma. 18, 287 (2017).
98.
Wang, J., Vasaikar, S., Shi, Z., Greer, M. & Zhang, B. WebGestalt
2017: a more comprehensive, powerful, ﬂexible and interactive
gene set enrichment analysis toolkit. Nucleic Acids Res. 45,
W130–W137 (2017).
99.
Scott, R. T. et al. Advancing the integration of biosciences data
sharing to further enable space exploration. Cell Rep. 33,
108441 (2020).
100. Houerbi, N. et al. Secretome proﬁling reveals acute changes in
oxidative stress, brain homeostasis, and coagulation following
short-duration spaceﬂight. Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.1109378 (2024).
Acknowledgements
C.E.M. thanks the WorldQuant Foundation, NASA (NNX14AH50G,
NNX17AB26G, 80NSSC22K0254, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2,
80NSSC23K0832), the National Institutes of Health (R01MH117406,
P01CA214274 R01CA249054, R01 AI151059), and the L.L.S.
(MCL7001-18, LLS 9238-16). E.G.O. is funded by NASA
(80NSSC21K0316). J.K. thanks MOGAM Science Foundation. J.K. was
supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Edu-
cation(RS-2023-00241586). J.K. acknowledge Boryung for their
ﬁnancial support and research enhancement ground, provided
through their Global Space Healthcare Initiative, Humans In Space,
including mentorship and access to relevant expert networks. The
astronaut cytokine data were provided from the Nutritional Status
Assessment project and the Biochemical Proﬁle Projects which were
funded by the Human Health Countermeasures Element of the NASA
Human Research Program. L.P. thanks to the Association of Trans-
disciplinary Society of Personalized Oncology for Combating Cancer
for ﬁnancial support through the postdoctoral research fellowship
STOP Cancer.
Author contributions
Conceived and designed the experiments: C.E.M., N.H., J.K., E.G.O.,
Sample and library processing: I.M., L.P., S.L., F.V., G.T., Q.C., D.M., J.K.,
E.G.O., N.D., D.N., K.A.R., C.M., Plasma and EVP proteomics data pro-
cessing: ND, JK. Metabolomics data processing: Q.C., A.Sc., R.B., PBMC
single-cell data processing: J.K., Direct RNA-seq analysis: E.G.O., Data
analysis, interpretation, ﬁgures: N.H., J.K., I.M., L.P., S.L., G.T., A.Sc., R.B.,
C.C., A.K., A.B., E.E.A., M.K., A.S.G., L.W., P.T., Q.Y., J.C., J.W.G., G.W.,
S.G., X.M. Manuscript writing: N.H., J.K., C.E.M., I.M., A.Si., L.P., J.W.H.,
R.B., S.A.N., A.B., D.H., J.W.G., G.W., B.S., S.G., J.M., X.M. All authors
discussed the results and contributed to the ﬁnal manuscript. All authors
read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Competing interests
C.E.M. is a co-Founder of Cosmica Biosciences. I.M. receives research
grant support/funding from Atossa Inc. A.S.G., L.W., P.T., Q.Y., J.C., R.B.,
A.S., and D.H. are employees of and have a ﬁnancial interest in Seer Inc.
and Prognomiq Inc. Jan Krumsiek holds equity in Chymia LLC and IP in
PsyProtix and is cofounder of iollo. The remaining authors declare no
competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Irina Matei or Christopher E. Mason.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
16

Nadia Houerbi1,2,18, JangKeun Kim
1,2,18, Eliah G. Overbey
1,2, Richa Batra
1, Annalise Schweickart
2,3, Laura Patras4,5,
Serena Lucotti4,6, Krista A. Ryon1, Deena Najjar
1, Cem Meydan
1,2, Namita Damle1, Christopher Chin
1,2,
S. Anand Narayanan7, Joseph W. Guarnieri8, Gabrielle Widjaja8, Afshin Beheshti
9,10, Gabriel Tobias4,11, Fanny Vatter4,11,
Jeremy Wain Hirschberg1, Ashley Kleinman1, Evan E. Afshin1,2, Matthew MacKay1,2, Qiuying Chen6, Dawson Miller6,
Aaron S. Gajadhar11, Lucy Williamson11, Purvi Tandel11, Qiu Yang11, Jessica Chu11, Ryan Benz11, Asim Siddiqui11,
Daniel Hornburg11, Steven Gross6, Bader Shirah
12, Jan Krumsiek
2,3, Jaime Mateus13, Xiao Mao
14, Irina Matei
4,15
&
Christopher E. Mason
1,2,3,16,17
1Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 2The HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for
Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 3Tri-Institutional Biology and Medicine program, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY 10021, USA. 4Children’s Cancer and Blood Foundation Laboratories, Departments of Pediatrics and Cell and Developmental Biology, Drukier Institute for
Children’s Health, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 5Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Center of Systems Biology, Biodiversity
and Bioresources, Faculty of Biology and Geology, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. 6Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medicine,
New York, NY, USA. 7Department of Nutrition & Integrative Physiology, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. 8Center of Mitochondrial and Epige-
nomic Medicine, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 9Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 10KBR, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 11Seer, Inc., Redwood City,CA 94065,
USA. 12Department of Neuroscience, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 13Space Exploration Technologies Corporation
(SpaceX), Hawthorne, CA, USA. 14Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences (BMES), Loma Linda University Health, Loma
Linda, CA 92350, USA. 15Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 16The Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill
Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA. 17WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA. 18These
authors contributed equally: Nadia Houerbi, JangKeun Kim.
e-mail: irm2224@med.cornell.edu; chm2042@med.cornell.edu
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48841-w
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4862 
17
