Citation: Shaka, S.; Carpo, N.; Tran,
V.; Cepeda, C.; Espinosa-Jeffrey, A.
Space Microgravity Alters Neural
Stem Cell Division: Implications for
Brain Cancer Research on Earth and
in Space. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23,
14320. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms232214320
Academic Editor: Daniela Grimm
Received: 17 October 2022
Accepted: 10 November 2022
Published: 18 November 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
 
International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
Space Microgravity Alters Neural Stem Cell Division:
Implications for Brain Cancer Research on Earth and in Space
Sophia Shaka, Nicolas Carpo, Victoria Tran, Carlos Cepeda and Araceli Espinosa-Jeffrey *
Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior,
The University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
* Correspondence: araceli@ucla.edu
Abstract: Considering the imminence of long-term space travel, it is necessary to investigate the
impact of space microgravity (SPC-µG) in order to determine if this environment has consequences
on the astronauts’ health, in particular, neural and cognitive functions. Neural stem cells (NSCs)
are the basis for the regeneration of the central nervous system (CNS) cell populations and learning
how weightlessness impacts NSCs in health and disease provides a critical tool for the potential
mitigation of speciﬁc mechanisms leading to neurological disorders. In previous studies, we found
that exposure to SPC-µG resulted in enhanced proliferation, a shortened cell cycle, and a larger cell
diameter of NSCs compared to control cells. Here, we report the frequent occurrence of abnormal
cell division (ACD) including incomplete cell division (ICD), where cytokinesis is not successfully
completed, and multi-daughter cell division (MDCD) of NSCs following SPC-µG as well as secretome
exposure compared to ground control (1G) NSCs. These ﬁndings provide new insights into the
potential health implications of space travel and have far-reaching implications for understanding
the mechanisms leading to the deleterious effects of long-term space travel as well as potential
carcinogenic susceptibility. Knowledge of these mechanisms could help to develop preventive or
corrective measures for successful long-term SPC-µG exposure.
Keywords: human neural stem cells; abnormal cell division; cytokinesis; gravitational research; brain;
microgravity; space ﬂight
1. Introduction
To determine the health risks associated with long-term space travel, it is essential to
consider the effects of space microgravity (SPC-µG) on the brain. It is well-established that
astronauts oftentimes experience adverse effects following a visit to outer space includ-
ing the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)-recognized spaceﬂight-
associated neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS) [1]. Potential risk factors as well as limitations
to lengthy space missions and stays at the International Space Station (ISS) are posed by
SANS, among other difﬁculties that astronauts face due to the gravitational differences in
space. This is particularly important because issues such as SANS can be experienced after
as little as 34 days, and unusual pathologic neuro-ophthalmic ﬁndings have been shown
after both short- and long-term space travel [2].
Many studies on the use of microgravity have been performed using an array of
cells both committed to a speciﬁc phenotype depending on the organ of study as well
as uncommitted cells known as stem cells. The origin of stem cells includes murine and
human origin. Among these are adult stem cells, embryonic stem cells, induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPS), and organ-speciﬁc stem cells [3]. Recent publications have described
changes in stem cells when exposed to simulated or space microgravity. Nonetheless,
there is limited information in what concerns neural stem cells. Prior research looking
at the effects of microgravity on neural stem cells has primarily been conducted with
the use of simulated microgravity (sim-µG). Sim-µG studies use machines that are able
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232214320
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
2 of 18
to simulate low gravity conditions such as the Mitsubishi 3D-Clinostat [4]. The use of
different microgravity platforms with application on stem cells and differentiated cells
has recently been reviewed [3]. Only a few studies have shown the effect of sim-µG or
SPC-µG speciﬁcally on neural stem cells. In this regard, Silvano and collaborators have
shown that murine cerebellar neural stem cells (NSCs) respond to sim-µG by the arrest
of their cell cycle in the S-phase with a concomitant increase in apoptosis. These changes
occurred in a transient manner because upon return to 1G (Earth’s gravity), the authors
described that the cells recovered their stemness and a normal cell cycle [5]. We have
previously reported a result that appears to contradict Silvano et al.’s ﬁndings, where
we found that NSCs in sim-µG proliferated more and displayed a smaller diameter than
1G grown NSCs [6]. A recent discovery that spaceﬂight upregulated proliferation and
survival genes in neural crest derived stem cells while the random positioning machine
upregulated differentiation and inﬂammation genes emphasized the uniqueness of space
ﬂight conditions when compared to Earth controls [7].
Our current research avoids the use of sim-µG and moves directly to the source of
microgravity – outer space. SPC-µG has demonstrated more pronounced effects of certain
phenomena when compared to sim-µG [8]. Although radiation and other environmental
differences cannot be excluded as contributing factors, the ﬁndings are similar between
sim-µG and SPC-µG, save for the difference in degree [8].
The results of the current study provide outcomes not previously reported in sim-µG
studies, with the additional beneﬁt of added relevance to the astronauts’ health. Here,
four conditions of NSCs derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPS) are
considered. In the ground control condition (1G), NSCs did not experience any SPC-µG,
although other cellular conditions were the same as the experimental groups (more details
on the procedure are available in Section 2). The second group consisted of 1G naïve sister
cells of the space-ﬂown NSCs that were treated with the secretome, which is our term for
the secreted medium from space-ﬂown cells. Finally, we also looked at two groups of NSCs
following space ﬂight, with the ﬁrst group captured one week post-ﬂight, and the ﬁnal
group captured at two weeks post-ﬂight.
Due to the nature of the study looking at abnormalities in cell division, it is important
to understand the intricacies of the cell cycle and the potential stage(s) for error. In the case
of one of the abnormalities, we deemed incomplete cell division (ICD) as failed cytokinesis.
Cytokinesis is a highly complex, regulated process that requires an extensive number of
cellular processes, proteins, and signaling factors to function properly. Cytokinetic failure
can occur due to defects in any of its four stages, which include positioning of the division
plane, ingression of the cleavage furrow, formation of the midbody, and abscission [9].
Cytokinetic failure following the division of the cell nucleus, or karyokinesis, can result in
a tetraploid cell with double nuclei and four copies of each chromosome rather than the
expected two. For some cells of the human body such as in the heart or liver, tetraploidy is
a normal process [9]. However, in many cases, tetraploidy can be a sign of a deleterious
abnormality such as a tumor precursor [10].
Previous work in the literature has conﬁrmed that embryonic and induced pluripotent
stem cells behave similarly in terms of cell cycle components. Embryonic stem cell pluripo-
tency is maintained through unique and highly speciﬁc signaling. These cells enter the S
phase more rapidly with a shortened G1 due to impaired or atypical checkpoint control in
embryonic stem cells and unusual activation patterns [11].
Our previous ﬁndings showed that NSCs proliferate at a higher rate while in space
as well as up to 72 h following space ﬂight, irrespective of ﬂight duration [2,4]. We
also showed that changes in the cell diameter occurred post-ﬂight, with 81% of NSCs
exhibiting a diameter of 10 µm or higher following space ﬂight compared to 49.2% of
the control NSCs [4]. While the undifferentiated NSCs in adult human brain areas such
as the subventricular zone and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus remain quiescent
under normal circumstances, the environment of SPC-µG exposure is likely to alter the
expected behavior of these cells [12]. The changes described above including increased

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
3 of 18
proliferation and enlarged cell diameter [13] could contribute to symptoms of SANS that
astronauts experience post-ﬂight such as intracranial hypertension. Here, in addition to
the aforementioned differences, we noticed that some SPC-µG NSCs appeared to have
difﬁculties with the completion of cytokinesis with enough frequency to be of interest for
further investigation. The current study takes a closer look at proliferation abnormalities
in single cell division. Throughout this paper, the term ICD refers to an ultimate failure
of cytokinesis, regardless of whether karyokinesis has occurred, and multi-daughter cell
division (MDCD) refers to the appearance of more than two daughter cells as would be
typical for a single cell division following cytokinesis. The term abnormal cell division
(ACD) refers to either phenomena, ICD and/or MDCD. We investigated the hypothesis
that, compared to 1G NSCs, there are signiﬁcantly increased instances of ICD, MDCD,
and ACD following exposure to SPC-µG. We also hypothesized that the space-produced
secretome would have a similar effect on naïve NSCs.
2. Results
2.1. Time-Lapse Microscopy Analysis
2.1.1. A Subpopulation of NSCs Back from Space Displayed Incomplete Divisions
Observations of SPC-exposed NSCs revealed that although these cells proliferated
more than their ground control counterparts, a sub-population of them attempted to divide
unsuccessfully. These abnormally dividing cells displayed two cell bodies, yet ultimately
did not achieve complete cell division into two daughter cells, instead remaining as a larger
cell and preserving that state for the rest of the time-lapse imaging, as shown in Figure 1. In
terms of the differences between the 1G and SPC-µG exposed NSCs, Figure 1A–I illustrates
an example of incomplete cytokinesis. The average numbers (bar graph) and percentages
(pie graphs) show the raw numbers and proportion of cells involved in ICDs throughout
the time-lapse videos. There was an upward trend observed among the groups, with the
NSCs two weeks after SPC-µG exposure showing the highest number of instances of ICD.
For the control group, the average total number of cells was 1606 with an average ratio of
5.67 ICDs per 1606 cells. For the SPC–µG exposed NSCs, there were on average 8.5 ICDs
per 1370 NSCs one week after spaceﬂight, and 11 ICDs per 903 cells across the different
scenes analyzed two weeks post-ﬂight.
However, because the total number of cells differed among the three conditions, we
also estimated the relative proportions of ICDs. This was calculated by dividing the number
of ICDs by the total number of cells present at the exact middle of each time-lapse video.
The middle frame represented an approximate mean between the number of cells present
at the start of the time-lapse compared with the number of cells present at the end of the
video after proliferation had occurred. When comparing the different proportions, the
Chi-square test demonstrated statistically signiﬁcant differences (p = 0.045) (Figure 1K).
2.1.2. A Subpopulation of SPC-NSCs Displayed Multi-Daughter Cell Divisions
In addition to ICD, we found multi-daughter cell division, which was also examined.
An example of multi-daughter cell division where one cell gave rise to three cells at the end
of cytokinesis is shown in Figure 2A–C. The average number of cells exhibiting MDCD one
week and two weeks after space ﬂight and the percentage of MDCD instances are shown
(Figure 2D,E).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
4 of 18
 
Figure 1. An example from time-lapse microscopy of SPC-NSCs 1 week (A–F) and 2 weeks after
space ﬂight. One week after returning to Earth, the cells had completely recovered from their round
trip to space. They were healthy, displaying cell processes, and were proliferative. (A) Nonetheless, a
subpopulation appeared to have acquired a larger size (arrow) when observed under phase-contrast
microscopy. (B) When time-lapse images were examined, we found that some cells had started the
proliferation process (i.e., the cells appeared to be dividing (arrows)). (C,D) The cell appeared to
have reached the full division process. (E) Instead of two daughter cells, they had fused together,
(F) remaining that way for the rest of the time the cells were imaged. This event lasted 2.5 h
(arrowheads show the cells of interest). (G,H), another example of NSCs two weeks post-ﬂight
exhibiting ICD occurring at 102.25 h into time-lapse (shown in part H) and no visible cytokinesis,
with the NSC returning to one cell by 105.25 h (shown in part I). Cell(s) of interest are indicated by
the yellow arrow(s). The cells ﬁnally merged and remained that way until the end of the experiment.
Scale bar = 50 µm. (J) Quantitative data showing that more instances of ICDs were seen in the
SPC-exposed NSCs. The average number of cells that exhibited ICD during the 50 h that NSCs were

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
5 of 18
under observation via time-lapse microscopy. The purple bar denotes ground control (1G) NSCs.
The green bar represents SPC-NSCs one week after returning from the ISS. The orange bar denotes
NSCs two weeks after space ﬂight. Data analysis was performed with one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey multiple comparisons test in which * p < 0.05 was deﬁned as statistically signiﬁcant; and the
Chi-square test (for percentages) demonstrated statistically signiﬁcant differences (p = 0.045). Data
represent the mean of four separate scenes for all three conditions of NSCs shown. (K) This chart
represents the average percentage of incomplete division across groups where normal NSCs that
remained on Earth and NSCs one week after returning from space did show very similar cell numbers
and the same percentage, while two weeks after space ﬂight, the number of ICD cases accounted
for 58%.
 
Figure 2. An example from time-lapse microscopy of SPC-µG exposed NSCs exhibiting MDCD
2 weeks post-ﬂight. (A) Cells prior to dividing. (B) Three hours later, at 31.33 h, there were three
cells visible. (C) These three daughter cells survived for the duration of the experiment and within
50 min, they had developed cell processes. The yellow arrow in all three images points to the mother
cell. Quantitative data where NSCs ﬂown to space displayed more instances of MDCDs were seen
one week post-space ﬂight, and even more NSCs presented this behavior. (D) The bar graph on the
left, shows the average number of cells that exhibited MDCD during the 50 h that the NSCs were
under observation via time-lapse microscopy. The green bar denotes ground control (1G) NSCs. The
blue bar represents SPC-NSCs one week after returning from the ISS. The yellow bar denotes NSCs
two weeks after space ﬂight. (E) Results shown as percentage. Data analysis was performed with
one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey multiple comparisons test in which * p < 0.05 was deﬁned as
statistically signiﬁcant * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.001 and the Chi-square test (for percentages) demonstrated
statistically signiﬁcant differences (p = 0.045). Please also see MP41 in the Supplementary Materials.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
6 of 18
As both ICD and MDCD (triple divisions) can be considered within the realm of ACDs,
we also compared the total number of ACDs among the three conditions. Although the
averages differed between the groups in terms of MDCDs, the sum of ICDs and MDCDs
proved statistically signiﬁcant. (Figure 3).
 
Figure 3. The bar graph on the left depicts the total number of cells abnormally divided (exhibiting
either ICD or MDCD) across four scenes of time-lapse microscopy for each of the three groups. The
experimental group of SPC-µG exposed NSCs 2 weeks post-ﬂight displayed a statistically signiﬁcantly
greater amount of ACD compared to the control group and the one week post-ﬂight SPC-ﬂown NSCs
(p = 0.0048 for 1G vs. SPC 2 weeks PF; p = 0.0052 for SPC 1 week PF vs. SPC 2 weeks PF). The pie graph
shows the difference in the proportion of ICD between the 1G control NSCs (orange), SPC-µG exposed
NSCs one week post-ﬂight (brown), and SPC-µG exposed NSCs two weeks post-ﬂight (salmon).
NSCs two weeks following space ﬂight displayed a signiﬁcantly increased frequency of ICD. Data
analysis was performed with one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey multiple comparisons test
in which * p < 0.05 was deﬁned as statistically signiﬁcant; and the Chi-square test (for percentages)
results were signiﬁcant with p = 0.0135. Data represent the mean of four separate scenes for each
color-coded condition.
2.2. Effects of the Secretome on Naïve NSCs Cell Divisions
To ascertain if these changes had been exerted directly on the cells during space ﬂight,
we examined if there were molecules that would have been secreted by NSCs under the
inﬂuence of microgravity. For this experiment we seeded the cells and followed them for
72 h, time at which we added the secretome to the cells in a 2:1 ratio V/V. We found that
the secretome produced similar results in terms of incomplete cytokinesis suggesting that
secreted molecules rather than mechanical forces are responsible for these effects (Figure 4).
We examined the question of whether or not the secretome would also produce similar
effects on naïve NSCs that had never ﬂown to space in terms of MDCD. An example of
MDCD in the naïve NSCs treated with secretome is shown (Figure 5A–C), where one cell
divides into three daughter cells and the three cells continue to survive and move around
for the duration of the time-lapse.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
7 of 18
 
Figure 4. Average number of cells that exhibited ICD during the 70 to 130 h that NSCs were under
observation via time-lapse microscopy. The pink bar denotes naïve NSCs with no exposure to SPC-µG
or secretome. The turquoise blue bar denotes naïve 1G NSCs following the addition of secretome
(p = 0.037). The pie chart shows the ratio of incomplete division events compared to the total number
of cells in the time-lapse for each condition. Data analysis was performed with one-way ANOVA
followed by the Tukey multiple comparisons test in which * p < 0.05. Data represent the mean of
four separate scenes for each color-coded condition. Chi-square test (for percentages) results were
signiﬁcant with p = 0.001. Data represent the mean of four separate scenes for each color-coded
condition. See also MP42 in the Supplementary Materials.
While looking at the raw numbers can provide useful information, it is important to
consider that the total number of visible cells as ﬁlmed through time-lapse microscopy
differs for each scene. Therefore, the pie charts in Figures 1 and 3 take this into account
in order to display the fraction of total cells that exhibited ICD or ACD. There was a
signiﬁcantly greater proportion of ICDs found in the experimental group of NSCs two
weeks post-ﬂight (1.22%) compared to the other groups, with the 1G naïve NSCs at 0.35%
and the NSCs one week post-ﬂight exhibiting 0.62% ICD. Concerning the sum of ICD and
MDCD, there was also a signiﬁcantly greater proportion of ACDs found in the SPC-µG
exposed NSCs two weeks post-ﬂight (1.68%). The 1G naïve NSCs exhibited ACD at a
frequency of 0.58%, the same cells after the addition of secretome exhibited ACD 0.98% of
the time, and the SPC-µG exposed NSCs one week post-ﬂight had a percentage of 0.56% the
inﬂuence of microgravity. In addition to ICD, the raw numbers of cells involved in either
ICD or MDCD, deemed ACDs, were also graphed (Figure 6). For the control group, the
average total number of cells was 1606 with an average ratio of 9.33 ACDs per 1606 cells.
After the medium was switched to incorporate secretome, this value changed drastically,
with an average of 15.67 ACDs per 1606 cells. For the SPC–µG exposed NSCs, there were
on average 7.63 ACDs per 1370 NSCs one week after spaceﬂight, while there were on
average 15.17 ICDs per 903 cells across the different scenes analyzed two weeks post-ﬂight
(Figure 6).

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
8 of 18
 
Figure 5. This example from the time-lapse microscopy of naïve 1G NSCs following treatment with
SPC-µG NSCs secretome shows: (A) A NSC MDCD; (B) The cell gives rise to two daughter cells:
(C) The cells had successfully completed cytokinesis with three cells visible beginning at 60 h and
remaining as three cells for the duration of the video. The arrow points to the mother cell and the
arrowheads designate the daughter cells. (D) The bar graph on the left depicts the total number of
cells displaying MDCD across four scenes of time-lapse microscopy for each of the three groups. The
secretome produced by NSCs while in space increased the number of triple cell divisions although
these differences were not signiﬁcant. (E) The pie graph shows the difference in the proportion
of MDCD between the 1G control NSCs. Data analysis was performed with one-way ANOVA
followed by the Tukey multiple comparisons and the Chi-square test (for percentages) results were
not signiﬁcant. Data represent the mean of four separate scenes for each color-coded condition.
From these data, it is clear that there were statistically signiﬁcant differences in the
amount of ACD as well as ICD alone following cellular exposure to SPC-µG, particularly
when looking at NSCs two weeks following SPC-µG exposure. While not always statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, there are also more instances of both ICD and ACD following the addition
of secretome to the NSCs.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
9 of 18
 
Figure 6. The bars on the graph represent the total number of NSCs abnormally divided (exhibiting
either ICD or MDCD) for naïve NSCs, SPC-NSCs, and naïve NSCs treated with SPC-NSC secretome.
Data were obtained from four scenes of time-lapse microscopy for each of the four groups. The
experimental group of SPC-µG exposed NSCs 2 weeks post-ﬂight (PF) displayed a statistically
signiﬁcantly greater amount of ACD compared to the control group and the one week post-ﬂight
SPC-ﬂown NSCs (p = 0.0048 for 1G vs. SPC 2 weeks PF; p = 0.0052 for SPC 1 week PF vs. SPC 2 weeks
PF). Naïve-NSCs results were also signiﬁcantly different with respect to the naïve (non-treated)
NSCs. The pie chart shows the ratio of abnormally divided cells compared to the total number
of cells in the time-lapse for each condition. NSCs two weeks following space ﬂight displayed a
signiﬁcantly increased frequency of ACD. Moreover, a signiﬁcant difference was also found in naïve-
NSCs exposed to SPC-secretome. Data analysis was performed with one-way ANOVA followed by
the Tukey multiple comparisons test in which * p < 0.05 and ** p < 0.01 was deﬁned as statistically
signiﬁcant; the Chi-square test (for percentages) demonstrated that the results were signiﬁcant with
p = 0.001. Data represent the mean of four separate scenes for each color-coded condition.
2.3. Immunoﬂuorescence
Immunocytochemistry was performed on both the control and experimental groups
of NSCs. These cells were examined for the expression of NSC markers in order to conﬁrm
lineage. The normal morphology and physiology of NSCs are partially dependent on the
cytoskeleton, which is composed of intermediate ﬁlaments, actin, and microtubules.
One of the proteins detected by immuno-ﬂuorescence was neuroepithelial stem cell
protein (nestin). Nestin expression was of interest because as a type VI intermediate
ﬁlament (IF) protein, nestin is primarily expressed in dividing NSCs. Potential differences
in nestin expression between the control and experimental NSCs allows for a deeper
examination of morphological differences that may be present after exposure to SPC-µG
or secretome. In addition to nestin, tubulin expression was also examined. As a major
component protein essential for microtubule formation, tubulin expression is also bound to
reveal information regarding the cell cytoskeleton. Furthermore, it has been conﬁrmed that
tubulin is expressed in nestin-positive cells, which aids in testing the validity of our work.
The results of the immunoﬂuorescence are shown in Figure 7.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
10 of 18
 
Figure 7. Representative views displaying the immunocytochemical distribution of nestin (red) and
tubulin beta II (green). (A) Nestin expression in the 1G control NSCs is positive, with nuclei clearly
visible. (B) Tubulin expression in 1G NSCs is also positive. (C) SPC–µG exposed NSCs intensely
expressed nestin in most cells. (D) Tubulin was faintly expressed in some SPC–µG exposed NSCs but
most cells were negative.
3. Discussion
It is well-accepted that normal mammalian cell division occurs by the mother cell
giving rise to two daughter cells. This is the result of enhanced phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of CDK–cyclin complexes to ensure well-deﬁned transitions through
cell cycle stages [13]. Control checkpoints of the cell cycle act as regulators that activate
when they detect a “danger” or abnormal situations such as defects in DNA replication
or chromosome segregation. Therefore, loss of cell cycle regulation can lead to cancer [14].
We have previously reported a robust enhancement of NSC proliferative potential as
well as an increased number of NSCs of larger size [8], a phenomenon also known as
hypertrophy, which may occur in response to injury. For example, hypertrophy of cardiac
myocytes implicates changes in the gene expression proﬁle where “embryonic genes”
reactivate, modifying the contractile protein structure and density of hormone receptors [14].
“Physiologic hypertrophy” is considered adaptive with the goal to improve cell and organ
function. Pathologic hypertrophy may be an adaptive response at the beginning, but often
results in changes in gene expression that can exacerbate dysfunction and may lead to

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
11 of 18
cancer. Here, we demonstrated that features associated with cancer of the CNS appear
to have been accentuated on NSCs by space ﬂight. Through this study, we discovered
that a subset of NSCs ﬂown to space displayed hyperplasia, which is characterized by an
increased number of daughter cells. Although the percentage of cells showing three or
more daughter cells was small, it was statistically signiﬁcant.
It has previously been shown that when simulating the three-dimensional mechanical
conﬁnement found in the in vivo milieu, cancer HeLa cells often divided into three or even
ﬁve daughter cells [15]. Moreover, higher conﬁnement and stiffness gave rise to increased
asymmetry and multi-daughter division [15]. In our case, we did not use conﬁnement nor
cancerous cells. However, we found an increased number of instances of abnormal division
between one and two weeks post-space ﬂight. We believe that the mechanical forces exerted
on NSCs after space ﬂight were those from terrestrial gravity (1G), which makes cells adhere
stronger to the plastic substratum that is more rigid than the mesh carrier on which cells
grew and ﬂew back and forth to space/Earth. Nonetheless, the results from the naïve NSCs
treated with secretome demonstrate that the space environment induces the production
and secretion of soluble factors that exert the same behavior on normal self-renewing cells
(i.e., naïve NSCs), resulting in ACD without changing the mechanical forces. In terms of
MDCD, it is possible that it had resulted as a compensatory mechanism from a stem cell
having two or three nuclei trying to remedy multi-nucleated cells by giving three daughter
cells in the following generation.
Based on our results, SPC-µG has cellular effects that increase instances of abnor-
malities in single cell division, particularly when considering ICD and MDCD. The same
trend was observed following the addition of the secretome from SPC-NSCs to naïve-NSCs.
Thus, elucidation of the molecules that may be responsible for the observed effects is of
the essence. Therefore, we analyzed the secretome proﬁle of NSCs ﬂown to space and
found that the most enriched molecule was the secreted protein acidic and rich in cys-
teine (SPARC), produced by these NSCs while in space [16]. Being a matricellular protein,
SPARC’s main function is to modulate cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions and it is mainly
expressed in the bone and endothelial cells [17,18]. Nonetheless, it is also highly expressed
during embryonic life in notochord, chondrocytes, and other tissues of the embryonic
skeleton functioning as a remodeling protein [19], and it is also expressed in macrophages
at injury sites [20–22]. It has been postulated that SPARC may also play a role in different
types of cancer, and in some cases, it has promoted the inhibition of breast cancer [23];
SPARC is expressed in grade 3 tumors, but other studies have shown that higher expression
of SPARC correlated with decreased metastasis [24]. There is a compilation of studies on
the effects of different levels of SPARC expression in tumors and neighboring cells where in
some cases SPARC is deleterious and in other types of cancer, it inhibits proliferation and
metastasis [19]. For example, a high expression of SPARC has been reported in advanced,
metastatic melanoma [25]. In brain gliomas, SPARC is detrimental in that it promotes the
survival and invasion of glioma cells [19]. High levels of puriﬁed SPARC act as an inhibitor
of both neuroblastoma growth and angiogenesis [26,27]. SPARC is considered by some as a
cancer therapeutic agent due to its ability to inhibit proliferation and enhance apoptosis in
the ovary, colorectum, pancreas, neuroblastoma, and leukemia [19]. However, in the case
of neural cells, it is deleterious.
Although our NSCs were not tumor derived, it is possible that NSCs in space display
this novel vulnerability that might be triggered and/or enhanced to increase the frequency
of abnormal cell division as a function of time. This phenomenon is similar to the progres-
sion of a benign tumor into a malignant tumor, and it could be lethal, endangering the
space mission. Since our study was performed on Earth’s gravity, where naïve NSCs were
not exposed to the mechanical changes between microgravity and 1G, we believe that the
secretome produced by SPC-NSCs holds the key for the modulation or downregulation of
the abnormal cellular behaviors ICD and MDCD observed.
Having previously seen enhanced proliferation and hypertrophy [8], and in the current
study hyperplasia, in our NSCs post-ﬂight, it is easy to speculate that SPARC under different

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
12 of 18
gravity conditions such as on Mars or our Moon will be differentially regulated according
to the G-force the cells are subjected to. Therefore, modulation of SPARC’s gene expression
may lead us to harness the countermeasures necessary to protect the CNS of the astronauts
from neurodegeneration and cancer during and after space ﬂight. These attributes, together
with the increase in abnormal cell division, most likely contribute to SANS and other health
complications during or following space ﬂight. Stem cells are unique in that they are the
only human cell type with the ability to self-renew and produce an unlimited quantity of
daughter cells [19]. Therefore, any errors during cell division can lead to the promotion of
cancer. Endogenous damage to DNA as well as pathological and environmental factors
can lead to such cancer-promoting errors. Chemical and physical signals acting upon
stem cells can impact the life and death of the cell as well as their differentiation process.
Therefore, the risk of cancer is heavily inﬂuenced by extrinsic factors known as the ‘stem
cell environment’ or niche [19,20]. As opposed to directly altering DNA, non-genotoxic
agents are able to increase the risk of cancer through increasing cell proliferation [21]. The
changes observed during cell division noted in this paper have features of malignant stem
cells, mimicking the carcinogenic changes hypothesized to lead to cancers [22].
It is known that non-conventional mitosis events lead to tumor progression. Mechanosens-
ing is important for proper cell physiology and tissue homeostasis. Here, we propose that
SPARC is a gravity-sensor or gravitometer protein secreted by NSCs in response to an envi-
ronmental change that is gravity (G). Thus, SPARC’s upregulation by microgravity serves as a
marker for us to start designing strategies to regulate this gene, hence regulate proliferation
and other cues altered by µG. A factor not studied in our cells was space radiation, which may
also play a role in these changes and more work is needed to ascertain its net contribution to
potential brain cancer produced by space missions.
We have to acknowledge an important limitation of our current study on abnormalities
in stem cell division after exposure to microgravity. A detailed cell cycle analysis with
correlation to cytokinesis should be conducted before drawing any conclusions about when
during the cell cycle abnormalities are likely to occur. As all the cells returning from space
were used for the current experiments, and also due to funding constraints, those studies
will be considered as a top priority in the future. Another future direction that this research
could explore is a more detailed and high-deﬁnition exploration into the daughter cells
resulting from MDCD as well as the cells following ICD. Neither the proposal nor funding
for this project included the study of the mechanical effects of microgravity on our cells. To
the best of our knowledge, there are no published studies on the mechanical properties of
non-cancerous NSCs in microgravity and after microgravity exposure. It is known that the
cell cytoskeleton has a signiﬁcant role in adapting cells to mechanical inﬂuences such as
those caused by gravity changes. In fact, it has been shown that several hours or days of µg
exposure leads to signiﬁcant cytoskeletal changes in the form of microﬁlament thinning
and redistribution [28].
Aneuploidy, which is deﬁned as the loss or gain of one or more chromosomes from
a diploid gene, is a sign of genomic instability in human cancer cells. Aneuploidy likely
represents an early signiﬁcant event in tumorigenesis [29]. With the current resources, we
could not tell if the result of the ACDs could be affecting the cells at a chromosomal level.
Therefore, future research could aid the analysis of these cells and the potential detriments
of abnormalities in cell division.
In addition, prior research has found that neuroblastoma cancer cells exhibit increased
instances of asymmetrical cell division, where one stem cell progenitor and one differ-
entiated cell are the daughter cells produced in a single cell division. This asymmetric
division results from a decreased expression of the MYCN proto-oncogene [30]. A future
genomics proﬁling study, looking into the expression of the MYCN gene as well as other
proto-oncogenes associated with defects in cell division and proliferation could further
research into the potential connection between the abnormalities seen following SPC-µG
exposure and cancer cells.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
13 of 18
A recent study has shown that in the mouse brain, there are polyploid neurons
throughout the development of the neocortex [31]. Nonetheless, it is not clear that the
study followed the mice through adulthood. Exit from the cell cycle during development
coincides with the differentiation of neurons that is critical for neuronal function. Main-
taining a non-dividing state in neurons is critical for brain function [32,33]. When cells
exit the cell cycle, they have diploid (2C) DNA content. There is evidence indicating that
polyploid cells in the CNS are more prevalent than previously thought and they may be
involved in the physiology and pathology of the brain, where cell cycle re-entry is widely
deleterious to neurons. To date, the function of mononucleated neurons in the brain or that
of binucleated neurons in the autonomic nervous system is not known [34]. It has been
hypothesized that these neurons are involved in cell cycle re-entry and neurodegeneration,
and neurons entering the cell cycle as well as bi-nucleated neurons have also been reported
in Alzheimer’s disease [35–37]. Therefore, space-based studies will help humans on Earth
and astronauts during and after space missions, as summarized in a recent review [38].
Finally, the literature shows that analysis of the mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-secretome
promotes both NSCs commitment to the oligodendroglial lineage, differentiation, and myelin
formation and differentiation of neural stem cells in vivo. The secreted protein tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinase type 1 (TIMP-1) was revealed to be an active component of the MSC-
conditioned medium. Nonetheless, this work was performed in 1G, not in microgravity.
Moreover, it induced cell commitment and lineage progression, which has nothing to do with
abnormal cell division.
It is likely that a vast array of small molecules and proteins including cytokines
and other factors are secreted by NSCs on Earth. However, characterization of those
factors produced and secreted by NSCs is still in its infancy. Thus far, only three factors
(PGE2, TGF-β1, and TGF-β2) have been unequivocally identiﬁed. Others are still awaiting
identiﬁcation [39]. For this reason, we did not want to speculate further on the nature of
possible molecules that might be responsible for the abnormal cell division we report in this
manuscript. To our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst group studying the effects of the secretome
produced in space by hiPS derived NSCs. Analysis of the NSCs-produced secretome is
currently being performed and we hope to report the data in the near future.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Space Flight
Induced pluripotent human neural stem cells known as cell line “CS83iCTR-33n21”
derived from skin ﬁbroblasts were used for the space ﬂight. The cells were reprogrammed
by Cedars-Sinai Medical Center through a material transfer agreement and subsequently
induced using the STM medium. For further details regarding the steps of the space ﬂight
protocol, see our previous publications as well as Figure 8 below [3]. Both space-ﬂown
and ground control cells underwent the same ﬂight preparation procedures, and all cells
were grown in hardware and pre-seeded onto mesh carriers in passive units. For this
study, both gravity conditions used hardware from Yuri through the payload developer
Space Technology and Advanced Research System (STaARS). We used the facility known
as the STaARS-EF-1 platform on board the ISS, with ﬂight-tested growth and observation
chambers shown in Figure 8. The hardware-units containing the experiment electrically
and mechanically interfaced through a clip-in-place mechanism onto the STaARS EF-1.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
14 of 18
 
Figure 8. NSCs were seeded on ﬂoating mesh carriers that promote strong cell adhesion. Four cell
carriers of 2 × 2 mm were placed in each well pre-launch. Cells ﬂew onboard Space X-16, spent a
total of 39.6 days in space at the ISS, 248 m (400 km) above the Earth’s surface. Cells were transferred
to Long Beach (CA, USA) Airport after splashdown and brought to the UCLA laboratory at 37 ◦C.
Upon arrival, cells were seeded into ﬂasks or ﬂaskettes and allowed to recover for six hours in the
incubator and subsequently placed in the imaging system (Adapted from Shaka et al., 2021 [13]).
SPC-µG exposure: NSCs were ﬂown aboard SpaceX-16 to the ISS and remained
onboard the ISS for 39.6 days before returning to Earth, as shown in Figure 8. The cell
chambers contained 2 × 2 mm mesh carriers and the culture medium was equilibrated
overnight at 5% CO2 in the incubator where cells were maintained before the ﬂight. Upon
arrival, cells were seeded into ﬂasks or ﬂaskettes and allowed to recover for six hours in the
incubator and subsequently placed in the imaging system. (Figure modiﬁed from Shaka
et al., 2021 [13]). A chart deﬁning the abnormal cell division terminology is also shown
(Figure 9).
4.2. Secretome Collection and Naïve NSC Cell Treatment
The conditioned medium secreted by space-ﬂown cells, otherwise known as secretome,
was collected from the cell chambers separately from the cells. The samples were placed in
numbered tubes and subsequently frozen at −80 ◦C. Environmental parameters and the
experimental timeline for the 1G NSCs were based on that of the ISS in order to simulate
the conditions of the space ﬂight. Upon its recovery, we mixed two parts of culture medium
per one part of straight secretome to treat naïve NSCs grown in 1G cells. The secretome
was used straight (as it was obtained from the devices); no concentration was necessary to
see the effects shown in this paper. The 1G naïve sister cells of the space-ﬂown cells were

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
15 of 18
ﬁrst imaged with basal stem cell medium. The medium was switched to fresh medium
containing secretome at 44.5 h into the time-lapse video.
Figure 9. An elaboration upon the speciﬁc types of abnormal cell division we deﬁned for the scope
of this project. The numbers of abnormally dividing cells were counted by hand through the use of
Zeiss ZEN Blue Microscopy software 2020.
4.3. Time-Lapse Microscopy Analysis
Asynchronous experiments were performed following spaceﬂight on Earth for the
study of cell proliferation. The time-lapse microscopy imaging was conducted using
the ZEISS Axio Observer 7 fully motorized inverted research microscope equipped with
Deﬁnite Focus 2, ZEISS Axiocam 506 monochrome camera with ZEISS ZEN software,
and ZEISS Full Incubation XL chamber (Oberkochen, Germany) for temperature and CO2
control with a motorized scanning stage. The microscope collected images every 15 min in
seven different XYZ positions for a duration of about 72 h for each cell condition. The time-
lapse data were analyzed frame-by-frame by hand to scan for instances of ACD including
ICD and MDCD with the ZEN Blue 3.5 program. All data were charted in Microsoft Excel
for statistical analysis.
4.4. Immunoﬂuorescence and Nuclear Staining
Double immunoﬂuorescence using established markers for NSCs was performed
with the following antibodies used at a 1:100 dilution of nestin (BD Pharmingen, Franklin
Lakes, NJ, USA) and tubulin. NucBlue™, (Gibco|Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA,
USA) was also used for staining the nuclei of the NSCs (Figure 10). Immunoﬂuorescence
procedures included plating cells onto either coated plastic 8-well chambers (Nunc 177445),
or poly-d-lysine coated glass coverslips. To visualize the markers, the secondary antibodies
used were goat anti-rabbit IgG Texas Red (JIR) and goat anti-mouse IgG FITC (Sigma,
Tokyo, Japan).
 
Figure 10. Representative views of NucBlue used to stain cell nuclei to study nuclear abnormalities.
Dividing cells are indicated with white arrows and normal single nuclei cells are indicated with
yellow arrows. (A) 1G cells with NucBlue stain faintly expressed in nuclei. (B) SPC-µG exposed cells
two weeks post-spaceﬂight with NucBlue stain faintly expressed in nuclei.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
16 of 18
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms232214320/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.E.-J.; Methodology, A.E.-J.; Funding Acquisition and
Project Administration, A.E.-J.; Imaging, Data Curation, A.E.-J., S.S., V.T. and N.C.; Figure Composites,
N.C., A.E.-J.; Immunoﬂuorescence Experiments, S.S.; Manuscript Writing, A.E.-J., S.S. and C.C.;
Supervision, A.E.-J.; Review and Editing, C.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: NASA Space Biology for Grant: NNX15AB43G as well as NIH/NICHD grant number
U54HD087101-05, which supports the IDDRC Cell Culture Core.
Data Availability Statement: All data have been included in the manuscript.
Acknowledgments: We are very thankful to Amy Rowat and her research team for allowing us to
use their microscope system on short notice to be able to capture the changes produced by Earth
gravity on neural stem cells after space ﬂight. We are extremely grateful to Mark Mobilia, Geert de
Vreede, and the entire Zeiss team who provided unconditional assistance for the long-term time-lapse
imaging of our cells ﬂown onboard SpX-21. The advancement of science is based on fundamental
discoveries that would not be possible without the adequate tools and the timely help from supportive
people, and the Zeiss team is a perfect example. Having a loaner Zeiss Axio Observer 7 allowed
us to acquire optimal quality data. We also thank our NASA team including Fathi Karouia, Amie
Gresser. Elizabeth Pane, and Araceli (Medaya) Torres for their help with the logistics for the study.
The NASA Space Biology Project team at Ames Research Center, D. Tomko, K. Sato, E. Taylor, the
ARC Space Biology Project Manager, and the support personnel at the Space Station Processing
Facility at Kennedy Space Center: without their help, the ﬂight would not have been possible. Thank
you to the astronauts associated with the NASA Space Biology Project team. Special thanks for the
space ﬂight support to Maria Birlem and Chriss Bruderrek from Yuri and STaARS team members
Heath Mills, Tom Kyler, Jacquelyn Schoppe, and BreAnne MacKenzie as well as Uli Kuebler from
Airbus Defense and Space, who introduced us to their ﬂying hardware. We thank the astronauts
that helped with this study while onboard the ISS and Jack Miller for summarizing the dosimetry
data during this mission. We thank Dorwin Birt for the help with the computer and imaging systems.
Thanks to Elida Escalante for preparation of the mesh carriers and Aurora Espinosa de los Monteros
for help editing the text. We thank Stephen Cederbaum, Harley Kornblum, and Gerald Lipshutz for
signing the students’ contracts. Last but not least, we thank the late Jean de Vellis for his enthusiastic
support of our pioneering studies on the effect of microgravity on neural cells. Finally, thank you
to our funding from NASA Space Biology for Grant: NNX15AB43G as well as NIH/NICHD grant
number U54HD087101-05, which supports the IDDRC Cell Culture Core.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Zhang, L.-F.; Hargens, A.R. Spaceﬂight-Induced Intracranial Hypertension and Visual Impairment: Pathophysiology and
Countermeasures. Physiol. Rev. 2018, 98, 59–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Lee, A.G.; Mader, T.H.; Gibson, C.R.; Tarver, W.; Rabiei, P.; Riascos, R.F.; Galdamez, L.A.; Brunstetter, T. Spaceﬂight associated
neuro-ocular syndrome (SANS) and the neuro-ophthalmologic effects of microgravity: A review and an update. NPJ Microgravity
2020, 6, 7. [CrossRef]
3.
Grimm, D.; Egli, M.; Krüger, M.; Riwaldt, S.; Corydon, T.J.; Kopp, S.; Wehland, M.; Wise, P.; Infanger, M.; Mann, V.; et al.
Tissue Engineering Under Microgravity Conditions–Use of Stem Cells and Specialized Cells. Stem Cells Dev. 2018, 27, 787–804.
[CrossRef]
4.
Espinosa-Jeffrey, A.; Paez, P.; Cheli, V.; Spreuer, V.; Wanner, I.; De Vellis, J. Impact of Simulated Microgravity on Oligodendrocyte
Development: Implications for Central Nervous System Repair. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e76963. [CrossRef]
5.
Silvano, M.; Miele, E.; Valerio, M.; Casadei, L.; Begalli, F.; Campese, A.; Besharat, Z.M.; Alfano, V.; Abballe, L.; Catanzaro, G.
Consequences of Simulated Microgravity in Neural Stem Cells: Biological Effects and Metabolic Response. J. Stem Cells Res. Dev.
Ther. 2015, 5, 289.
6.
Green, J.; Taniguchi, A.; Oregel, K.; Espinosa-Jeffrey, A.; UCLA. The Implications of Microgravity on Cell Morphology and
Proliferation of Stem Cell Progenies towards Astronaut Health. IAC-16,A1,7,9,x35726. 2016. Available online: https://iafastro.
directory/iac/paper/id/35726/summary/ (accessed on 9 November 2022).
7.
Han, Y.; Zeger, L.; Tripathi, R.; Egli, M.; Ille, F.; Lockowandt, C.; Florin, G.; Atic, E.; Redwan, I.N.; Fredriksson, R.; et al. Molecular
genetic analysis of neural stem cells after space ﬂight and simulated microgravity on earth. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2021, 118, 3832–3846.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
17 of 18
8.
Shaka, S.; Carpo, N.; Tran, V.; Cepeda, C.; Espinosa-Jeffrey, A. Microgravity Signiﬁcantly Inﬂuences Neural Stem Cells Size and
Numbers: Implications for Long-term Space Missions. J. Stem Cells Res. Dev. Ther. 2021, 7, 1–9. [CrossRef]
9.
Normand, G.; King, R.W. Understanding Cytokinesis Failure. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2010, 676, 27–55. [CrossRef]
10.
Kroemer, G. Tetraploid cancer cell precursors. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2010, 11, 539. [CrossRef]
11.
Ohnuma, S.-I.; Harris, W.A. Neurogenesis and the Cell Cycle. Neuron 2003, 40, 199–208. [CrossRef]
12.
Obernier, K.; Alvarez-Buylla, A. Neural stem cells: Origin, heterogeneity and regulation in the adult mammalian brain. Develop-
ment 2019, 146, dev156059. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Shaka, S.; Carpo, N.; Tran, V.; Ma, Y.-Y.; Karouia, F.; Espinosa-Jeffrey, A. Human Neural Stem Cells in Space Proliferate more than
Ground Control Cells: Implications for Long-Term Space Travel. J. Stem Cells Res. Dev. Ther. 2021. [CrossRef]
14.
Collins, K.; Jacks, T.; Pavletich, N.P. The cell cycle and cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1997, 94, 2776–2778. [CrossRef]
15.
King, T.C. Cell Injury, Cellular Responses to Injury, and Cell Death. In Elsevier’s Integrated Pathology; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2007; pp. 1–20. [CrossRef]
16.
Tse, H.T.K.; Weaver, W.M.; Di Carlo, D. Increased Asymmetric and Multi-Daughter Cell Division in Mechanically Conﬁned
Microenvironments. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e38986. [CrossRef]
17.
Biancotti, J.C.; Carpo, N.; Zamudio, J.; Vergnes, L.; Espinosa-Jeffrey, A. Proﬁling the Secretome of Space Traveler Human Neural
Stem Cells. J. Stem Cells Res. Dev. Ther. 2022, 8, 1–12. [CrossRef]
18.
Bornstein, P.; Sage, E. Matricellular proteins: Extracellular modulators of cell function. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2002, 14, 608–616.
[CrossRef]
19.
Brekken, R.A.; Sage, E. SPARC, a matricellular protein: At the crossroads of cell–matrix communication: [Matrix Biology (2000)
569–580]. Matrix Biol. 2001, 19, 815–827. [CrossRef]
20.
Tai, I.T.; Tang, M.J. SPARC in cancer biology: Its role in cancer progression and potential for therapy. Drug Resist. Updat. 2008, 11,
231–246. [CrossRef]
21.
Kelm, R.J., Jr.; Hair, G.A.; Mann, K.G.; Grant, B.W. Characterization of human osteoblast and megakaryocyte-derived osteonectin
(SPARC). Blood 1992, 80, 3112–3119. [CrossRef]
22.
Chlenski, A.; Liu, S.; E Crawford, S.; Volpert, O.; Devries, G.H.; Evangelista, A.; Yang, Q.; Salwen, H.R.; Farrer, R.; Bray, J.; et al.
SPARC is a key Schwannian-derived inhibitor controlling neuroblastoma tumor angiogenesi. Cancer Res. 2002, 62, 7357–7363.
23.
Raines, E.W.; Lane, T.F.; Iruela-Arispe, M.L.; Ross, R.; Sage, E.H. The extracellular glycoprotein SPARC interacts with platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF)-AB and -BB and inhibits the binding of PDGF to its receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1992, 89,
1281–1285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Reed, M.J.; Puolakkainen, P.; Lane, T.F.; Dickerson, D.; Bornstein, P.; Sage, E.H. Differential expression of SPARC and throm-
bospondin 1 in wound repair: Immunolocalization and in situ hybridization. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 1993, 41, 1467–1477.
[CrossRef]
25.
Dhanesuan, N.; Sharp, J.A.; Blick, T.; Price, J.T.; Thompson, E.W. Doxycycline-Inducible Expression of SPARC/Osteonectin/ BM40
in MDA-MB-231 Human Breast Cancer Cells Results in Growth Inhibition. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 2002, 75, 73–85. [CrossRef]
26.
Wong, S.Y.; Crowley, D.; Bronson, R.T.; Hynes, R.O. Analyses of the role of endogenous SPARC in mouse models of prostate and
breast cancer. Clin. Exp. Metastasis 2007, 25, 109–118. [CrossRef]
27.
Ledda, M.F.; Adris, S.; Bravo, A.I.; Kairiyama, C.; Bover, L.; Chernajovsky, Y.; Mordoh, J.; Podhajcer, O.L. Suppression of SPARC
expression by antisense RNA abrogates the tumorigenicity of human melanoma cells. Nat. Med. 1997, 3, 171–176. [CrossRef]
28.
Buravkova, L.; Romanov, Y. The role of cytoskeleton in cell changes under condition of simulated microgravity. Acta Astronaut.
2001, 48, 647–650. [CrossRef]
29.
Brinkley, B.R. Managing the centrosome numbers game: From chaos to stability in cancer cell division. Trends Cell Biol. 2001, 11,
18–21. [CrossRef]
30.
Izumi, H.; Kaneko, Y.; Nakagawara, A. The Role of MYCN in Symmetric vs. Asymmetric Cell Division of Human Neuroblastoma
Cells. Front. Oncol. 2020, 10, 570815. [CrossRef]
31.
Jungas, T.; Joseph, M.; Fawal, M.-A.; Davy, A. Population Dynamics and Neuronal Polyploidy in the Developing Neocortex.
Cereb. Cortex Commun. 2020, 1, tgaa063. [CrossRef]
32.
Frade, J.M. Unscheduled re-entry into the cell cycle induced by NGF precedes cell death in nascent retinal neurones. J. Cell Sci.
2000, 113, 1139–1148. [CrossRef]
33.
Aranda-Anzaldo, A.; Dent, M.A. Why Cortical Neurons Cannot Divide, and Why Do They Usually Die in the Attempt? J.
Neurosci. Res. 2016, 95, 921–929. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Nandakumar, P.; Tian, C.; O’Connell, J.; Hinds, D.; Paterson, A.D.; Sondheimer, N. Nuclear genome-wide associations with
Mitochondrial Heteroplasmy. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabe7520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Nagy, Z. Mechanisms of neuronal death in Down’s syndrome.
In The Molecular Biology of Down Syndrome; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1999; Volume 57, pp. 233–245. [CrossRef]
36.
Nagy, Z. Cell cycle regulatory failure in neurones: Causes and consequences. Neurobiol. Aging 2000, 21, 761–769. [CrossRef]
37.
Zhu, X.; Siedlak, S.L.; Wang, Y.; Perry, G.; Castellani, R.J.; Cohen, M.L.; Smith, M.A. Neuronal binucleation in Alzheimer disease
hippocampus. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 2008, 34, 457–465. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 14320
18 of 18
38.
Marﬁa, G.; Navone, S.E.; Guarnaccia, L.; Campanella, R.; Locatelli, M.; Miozzo, M.; Perelli, P.; Della Morte, G.; Catamo, L.;
Tondo, P.; et al. Space ﬂight and central nervous system: Friends or enemies? Challenges and opportunities for neuroscience and
neuro-oncology. J. Neurosci. Res. 2022, 100, 1649–1663. [CrossRef]
39.
Wangler, S.; Kamali, A.; Wapp, C.; Wuertz-Kozak, K.; Häckel, S.; Fortes, C.; Benneker, L.M.; Haglund, L.; Richards, R.G.; Alini, M.;
et al. Uncovering the secretome of mesenchymal stromal cells exposed to healthy, traumatic, and degenerative intervertebral
discs: A proteomic analysis. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2021, 12, 11. [CrossRef]
