ARTICLE
OPEN
Spaceﬂight-induced vertebral bone loss in ovariectomized rats
is associated with increased bone marrow adiposity and no
change in bone formation
Jessica A Keune1, Kenneth A Philbrick1, Adam J Branscum2, Urszula T Iwaniec1,3 and Russell T Turner1,3
There is often a reciprocal relationship between bone marrow adipocytes and osteoblasts, suggesting that marrow adipose tissue
(MAT) antagonizes osteoblast differentiation. MAT is increased in rodents during spaceﬂight but a causal relationship between MAT
and bone loss remains unclear. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of a 14-day spaceﬂight on bone mass, bone
resorption, bone formation, and MAT in lumbar vertebrae of ovariectomized (OVX) rats. Twelve-week-old OVX Fischer 344 rats were
randomly assigned to a ground control or ﬂight group. Following ﬂight, histological sections of the second lumbar vertebrae
(n = 11/group) were stained using a technique that allowed simultaneous quantiﬁcation of cells and preﬂight ﬂuorochrome label.
Compared with ground controls, rats ﬂown in space had 32% lower cancellous bone area and 306% higher MAT. The increased
adiposity was due to an increase in adipocyte number (224%) and size (26%). Mineral apposition rate and osteoblast turnover were
unchanged during spaceﬂight. In contrast, resorption of a preﬂight ﬂuorochrome and osteoclast-lined bone perimeter were
increased (16% and 229%, respectively). The present ﬁndings indicate that cancellous bone loss in rat lumbar vertebrae during
spaceﬂight is accompanied by increased bone resorption and MAT but no change in bone formation. These ﬁndings do not support
the hypothesis that increased MAT during spaceﬂight reduces osteoblast activity or lifespan. However, in the context of ovarian
hormone deﬁciency, bone formation during spaceﬂight was insufﬁcient to balance increased resorption, indicating defective
coupling. The results are therefore consistent with the hypothesis that during spaceﬂight mesenchymal stem cells are diverted to
adipocytes at the expense of forming osteoblasts.
npj Microgravity (2016) 2, 16016; doi:10.1038/npjmgrav.2016.16; published online 28 April 2016
INTRODUCTION
The adult skeleton undergoes continuous bone remodeling, a
sequential process that involves bone resorption followed by
bone formation. Bone mineral density (BMD), a commonly used
index of bone mass in adults, is maintained over time when bone
formation is efﬁciently coupled to the prevailing rate of bone
resorption. Bone loss occurs when there is an imbalance between
bone formation and bone resorption where resorption predomi-
nates. Bone loss is a common occurrence among astronauts
during long-duration spaceﬂight. The reduction of BMD is
generally associated with an increase in biochemical markers of
bone resorption with no change in biochemical markers in bone
formation.1–3 These ﬁndings suggest that spaceﬂight results in
a defect in the coupling of bone formation to bone resorption.4
The precise mechanism for this is unknown.
Bone marrow adipose tissue (MAT) has generated considerable
recent
interest
as
a
putative
negative
regulator
of
bone
formation.5 Fat accumulates in bone marrow during prolonged
bed rest,6 a ground-based human model for spaceﬂight. Although
fat accumulation in bone marrow has not been veriﬁed in
astronauts, an increase in MAT has been observed in rodents
following spaceﬂight.7,8 Adipocytes and osteoblasts are derived
from mesenchymal stromal cells. Based primarily on cell culture
studies,
some
investigators
have
concluded
that
increased
adipocyte differentiation inevitably occurs at the expense of
osteoblast differentiation.9–11 If correct, then the increase in bone
marrow adiposity during spaceﬂight may reﬂect a shift in the
differentiation program of stromal cells from osteoblasts to
adipocytes. This may prevent normal coupling of bone formation
to the prevailing level of bone resorption and thus have a
causative role in the negative bone remodeling balance. The
anticipated consequence of this mechanism is reduced generation
of osteoblasts.
There is an alternative, non-mutually exclusive mechanism by
which increased MAT can negatively inﬂuence bone metabolism.
More than 50 adipocyte-derived adipokines, growth factors, and
proinﬂammatory cytokines have been identiﬁed, including inter-
leukin 1 beta (IL-1β). IL-1β inhibits bone formation and stimulates
bone resorption,12 and mRNA levels for IL-1β were shown to be
increased in tibia in rats ﬂown aboard STS-62 (ref. 13). Thus, factors
produced in bone marrow during spaceﬂight could reduce bone
formation by (1) slowing the rate of osteoblast appearance onto
bone surfaces, (2) increasing the rate of osteoblast disappearance
from bone surfaces, or (3) inhibiting osteoblast activity.
One or both mechanisms could perpetuate a cycle where
increasing MAT would lead to progressive bone loss during
prolonged
spaceﬂight.
The
present
study,
using
archived
vertebrae from rats ﬂown on STS-62, utilized a novel approach
to challenge these mechanisms by evaluating the association
1Skeletal Biology Laboratory, School of Biological and Population Health Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA; 2Biostatistics Program, School of Biological and
Population Health Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA and 3Center for Healthy Aging Research, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
Correspondence: RT Turner (russell.turner@oregonstate.edu)
Received 4 November 2015; revised 10 February 2016; accepted 13 March 2016
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
All rights reserved 2373-8065/16
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

between bone resorption, MAT accumulation, and osteoblast
kinetics in sexually mature ovariectomized (OVX) rats subjected to
a 14-day spaceﬂight.
RESULTS
Bone resorption increased during spaceﬂight
Compared with ground controls, ﬂight animals had 32% lower
cancellous bone area fraction (Figure 1a), 16% lower ﬂuorochrome
label length (indicative of greater resorption of preﬂight label;
Figure 1b), and 229% greater osteoclast perimeter (Figure 1c).
Indices of osteoblast kinetics were not altered during spaceﬂight
Signiﬁcant differences between ground control and ﬂight animals
were not detected for continuous bone formation (ﬂuorochrome
label with adjacent osteoblasts; Figure 2a), ceased bone formation
(ﬂuorochrome label with no adjacent osteoblasts; Figure 2b),
newly initiated bone formation (osteoblasts with no adjacent
ﬂuorochrome
label;
Figure
2c),
or
mineral
apposition
rate
(Figure 2d).
Bone marrow adiposity increased during spaceﬂight
Percent total tissue area occupied by adipocytes was 306%
greater in the ﬂight animals compared with ground controls
(Figure 3a). The increase in MAT was associated with increases in
adipocyte number (224%; Figure 3b) as well as adipocyte size
(26%; Figure 3c).
DISCUSSION
Fourteen days of spaceﬂight resulted in reduced cancellous bone
in the lumbar vertebrae of OVX rats. The bone loss was associated
with increased osteoclast-lined bone perimeter and decreased
preﬂight ﬂuorochrome label length. In addition, spaceﬂight
resulted in increased vertebral MAT due to increased adipocyte
number and adipocyte size. In contrast, spaceﬂight had no effect
on indices of osteoblast differentiation, turnover, or activity.
Lumbar vertebrae were not available from animals killed on the
day of launch. As baseline bone measurements were not obtained,
it is possible that the lower cancellous bone in the ﬂight animals
was due to reduced accrual of cancellous bone during ﬂight.
However, this possibility is remote as it is well established that
cancellous bone does not increase following OVX in 3-month-old
rats.14 Therefore, the lower cancellous bone in the ﬂight rats likely
represents bone loss over and above that due to OVX. This
conclusion is further supported by the previously documented
reduction in cancellous bone in tibia in the same animals where
baseline bones were available for analysis.15
On the basis of the increase in osteoclast perimeter and
reduced length of the preﬂight ﬂuorochrome label, the cancellous
bone loss during spaceﬂight occurred as a consequence of
increased bone resorption. OVX rats experience greatly elevated
cancellous bone turnover and ﬂuorochrome label resorption as
clearly illustrated by the presence of osteoclasts adjacent to the
preﬂight label (Figure 4). Increased resorption of a preﬂight
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Ground
Control
Flight
Bone Volume Fraction (%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Ground
Control
Flight
Label Length (mm/mm2)
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Ground
Control
Flight
Osteoclast Perimeter (%)
*
*
*
Figure 1.
Effects of spaceﬂight on cancellous bone area fraction
(a) and indices of bone resorption including ﬂuorochrome label
length/tissue area (b) and osteoclast perimeter (c). Data are
mean ± s.e., n = 11 per group. *Different from ground control,
Po0.05.
0.0
0.3
0.5
0.8
1.0
1.3
1.5
Ground
Control
Flight
Mineral Apposition Rate
(µm/day)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Ground
Control
Flight
Continuous Bone Formation
(%)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Ground
Control
Flight
Ceased Bone Formation
(%)
0
3
6
9
12
15
Ground
Control
Flight
Newly Initiated Formation
(%)
Figure 2.
Effects of spaceﬂight on indices of bone formation
including continuous bone formation (a), ceased bone formation
(b), newly initiated formation (c), and mineral apposition rate (d).
Data are mean ± s.e., n = 11 per group.
Bone loss during spaceﬂight
JA Keune et al
2
npj Microgravity (2016) 16016
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

ﬂuorochrome label during spaceﬂight was previously reported in
tibia in same animals.15 Furthermore, Vico et al.16 reported
increased osteoclast numbers in pregnant rats following a 5-day
spaceﬂight. We are unaware of other studies investigating the
effects of spaceﬂight on bone metabolism in female rats.
The effects of spaceﬂight on MAT have not been studied in
detail. Spaceﬂight was reported to increase MAT in growing male
rats but adipocyte number and size were not determined in these
studies.7,8,17 In the present study, the increase in MAT was
primarily due to an increase in number of adipocytes. We interpret
this as evidence that spaceﬂight results in increased differentiation
of progenitor cells to adipocytes. There was, however, an increase
in size that contributed to the overall increase in adiposity. This
may be relevant because increased adipocyte size is associated
with adipocyte dysfunction.18
Spaceﬂight had no effect on mineral apposition rate, suggesting
that the activity of osteoblasts present on bone surfaces at launch
was not altered. Spaceﬂight had no effect on bone perimeter with
osteoblasts adjacent to ﬂuorochrome label, suggesting that the
interval during which osteoblasts deposit matrix onto bone
surfaces was not altered. Last, spaceﬂight did not alter the extent
of bone perimeter lined by osteoblasts with no adjacent label. We
interpret this as evidence that spaceﬂight did not alter the rate of
appearance of new osteoblasts onto bone surface. These results
are consistent with and extend those of Cavolina et al., where no
changes in osteoblast perimeter, bone formation or expression of
genes related to osteoblast function were observed following
spaceﬂight.15 In addition, spaceﬂight increased interferon gamma
(IFNγ) expression in tibia in these animals.12 IFNγ is produced by
mesenchymal cells as well as innate and adaptive cells in the
immune system and has been reported to increase bone
formation and inhibit fat inﬁltration into bone marrow in OVX
mice.19 Taken together, these ﬁndings indicate that MAT inﬂux
during spaceﬂight does not reduce osteoblast differentiation,
activity or lifespan. Potentially, this is due to counter regulatory
increases in cytokines that oppose adipogenesis and promote
osteoblastogenesis.
OVX typically results in increased turnover of cancellous bone.
OVX-induced bone loss is limited to skeletal sites, such as the
proximal
tibial
metaphysis
and
lumbar
vertebra,
where
the increase in bone formation is inadequate to compensate for
the increase in bone resorption.20,21 In contrast, spaceﬂight
resulted in an increase in bone resorption with no increase in
bone formation in lumbar vertebra and in proximal tibia
metaphysis.15 These ﬁndings support the possibility that lineage
redirection of stromal cells to adipocytes during spaceﬂight
contributes to defective coupling of bone formation to increased
bone resorption.
The effects of spaceﬂight on cancellous bone turnover may be
inﬂuenced by endocrine status. Bone turnover in normal female
rats has not been evaluated following spaceﬂight. However, OVX
and ovary-intact rats have been evaluated following hindlimb
unloading, a ground-based model that replicates some of the
skeletal effects of spaceﬂight.22 Although hindlimb unloading
resulted in bone loss in OVX as well as ovary-intact rats, the
cellular mechanisms were not identical. Speciﬁcally, cancellous
bone loss in OVX rats was predominantly due to increased bone
resorption, whereas bone loss in ovary-intact rats was due to a
combination of increased bone resorption and reduced bone
formation.23,24 A reduction in estrogen signaling in the skeleton
results in increased bone turnover and cancellous bone loss.25
Reproductive changes during or post ﬂight have not been
systematically studied in women, but in female adult mice
spaceﬂight induced cessation of cycling, loss of corpora lutea,
and reduced estrogen receptor mRNA levels in the uterus.26
Most spaceﬂight studies have been performed using growing
male rats. Reduced bone formation from decreased osteoblast
number and activity has been observed in these animals.8,27–29
Although no spaceﬂight experiments comparing gender have
been conducted, direct comparison of the skeletal response of
normal male and female rats approaching skeletal maturity
(6 months old) to hindlimb unloading did not detect gender
differences.23 Therefore, it seems more likely high cancellous bone
turnover rate and/or change in endocrine status induced by OVX
modiﬁes how bone cells respond to microgravity. This is in
agreement with previous studies reporting that estrogen regulates
the rate of bone turnover independent of gravitational loading.
The difference in response may be important because endocrine
status could inﬂuence the efﬁcacy of pharmacological and
non-pharmacological interventions to prevent bone loss during
long-duration spaceﬂight.21
In summary, we conclude that the increase in MAT during short-
duration spaceﬂight does not impair osteoblast activity, reduce
the interval osteoblasts are present on bone surfaces or decrease
generation of new osteoblasts. These ﬁndings argue against the
hypothesis that increased MAT produces factors that suppress
bone
formation.
Although
increased
MAT
did
not
impact
osteoblast kinetics or bone formation, it is important to note that
bone formation did not increase during spaceﬂight to compensate
for the increase in bone resorption. This ﬁnding is consistent
with the hypothesis that, in the context of ovarian hormone
deﬁciency, osteoblast precursors are diverted to adipocytes
instead of osteoblasts during spaceﬂight.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental design
The experimental protocol was approved by the NASA Animal Care and
Use Committee, and animals were maintained in accordance with the NIH
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
Ground
Control
Flight
Adipocyte Number (#/mm2) 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Ground
Control
Flight
Adipocyte Size (µm2)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Ground
Control
Flight
Adipocyte Area (%)
*
*
*
Figure 3.
Effects of spaceﬂight on marrow adipose tissue (MAT)
area (a), adipocyte number (b) and adipocyte size (c). Data are
mean ± s.e., n = 11 per group. *Different from ground control,
Po0.05.
Bone loss during spaceﬂight
JA Keune et al
3
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
npj Microgravity (2016) 16016

Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Twelve-week-old female
Fischer 344 rats (Taconic Farms, Germantown, NY, USA) were used in the
study. The rats were OVX 14 days prior to launch and randomly assigned to
one of two treatment groups (n = 12 per group): (1) ground-based control
(ground control) or (2) spaceﬂight (ﬂight). The ﬂight animals were ﬂown on
the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-62) for 14 days. All animals were housed
in animal enclosure modules (AEM) with 6 rats per AEM. The AEMs were
maintained at 28 °C. Food (Teklad L356 food bars; Teklad, Madison, WI,
USA) and water were provided ad libitum to all animals. Rats received one
calcein injection (20 mg/kg, intraperitoneal) one day prior to launch to
label mineralizing bone matrix. The rats were killed by decapitation on the
day of landing and bones were collected and placed in 70% ethanol for
analysis.
Histomorphometry
Second lumbar vertebrae from 11 rats per group were available for
evaluation.
The
bones
were
prepared
for
histological
analysis
as
described.30 In brief, specimens were dehydrated in increased concentra-
tions of ethanol and embedded in a mixture of methyl methacrylate and
2-hydroxyethyl-methacrylate
(in
a
12.5:1
ratio).
Five-micrometer-thin
sections were then cut on a microtome (model 2065, Reichert-Jung,
Heidelberg, Germany) and stained with toluidine blue (Sigma Chemical,
St Louis, MO, USA). The staining technique allowed simultaneous
quantiﬁcation of cells and ﬂuorochrome label.
The effects of spaceﬂight on bone resorption and osteoblast turnover
(Figure 4) were evaluated using a novel approach. Speciﬁcally, the preﬂight
ﬂuorochrome label was used to identify bone perimeter undergoing
mineralization in preﬂight animals experiencing normal weight bearing.
Because preﬂight ﬂuorochrome label perimeter is assumed to be similar in
the rats randomly assigned to a group (ground control or ﬂight), post-ﬂight
differences in label length represent intergroup differences in bone
resorption during ﬂight. In turn, the perimeter bounded by preﬂight label
with adjacent osteoblasts represents continuous bone formation through-
out the duration of ﬂight (Figure 4a), whereas ﬂuorochrome label with no
adjacent osteoblasts reﬂects sites undergoing bone mineralization at the
time of label administration but not subsequently (ceased bone formation;
Figure 4b). In contrast, bone perimeter bounded by osteoblasts with no
adjacent label represents sites where bone formation was newly initiated
during ﬂight (i.e., following administration of the preﬂight label; Figure 4c).
Cell and ﬂuorochrome data were simultaneously collected by viewing
the sections under combined visible light and ultraviolet light using the
OsteoMeasure
System
(OsteoMetrics,
Atlanta,
GA,
USA).
Endpoints
evaluated included bone area fraction (bone area/tissue area, area of total
tissue evaluated occupied by cancellous bone, %), ﬂuorochrome label
length (length/tissue area, mm/mm2) and osteoclast perimeter (osteoclast
perimeter/bone perimeter, %). Fluorochrome-based indices of bone
formation included measurements of continuous bone formation during
ﬂight (percentage of bone lined with osteoblasts associated with the single
label; %), ceased bone formation during ﬂight (percentage of bone
perimeter with label not associated with osteoblasts, %), newly initiated
bone formation during ﬂight (percentage of osteoblast perimeter not
associated with label, %) and mineral apposition rate (mean distance
between the ﬂuorochrome marker and osteoblast-lined perimeter divided
by number of days between the label injection and killing (15 days),
μm/day). MAT (% tissue area) and adipocyte number (#/mm2) were
measured and adipocyte size (μm2) was determined by dividing MAT by
adipocyte number.
Statistical analysis
Mean
responses
were
compared
using
independent
two-sample
t-tests (ground control versus ﬂight). The required conditions for valid
use of t-tests were assessed using Levene’s test for homogeneity of
variance
and
the
Anderson–Darling
test
for
normality.
When
the
assumption of equal variance was violated, Welch’s two-sample t-test was
used for comparisons.31 When the assumption for normality was
violated, the Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test was performed. The Hochberg
adjustment method was used to control for multiple comparisons by
maintaining the familywise error rate at 5% (Hochberg 1988). Differences
were considered statistically signiﬁcant at Po0.05. All data are expressed
as mean ± s.e.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
Program (DGE-0956280) and a grant from the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NNX12AL24G). Grant Sponsors: NASA (NNX12AL24G) and NSF
(DGE-0956280).
CONTRIBUTIONS
Data collection: K.A.P., R.T.T. Data analysis: J.A.K., A.J.B. Data interpretation: J.A.K.,
K.A.P., A.J.B., U.T.I., R.T.T. Drafting manuscript: J.A.K., U.T.I., R.T.T. Approving ﬁnal
version of manuscript: J.A.K., K.A.P., A.J.B., U.T.I., R.T.T. R.T.T. takes responsibility for the
integrity of the data analysis.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Orwoll, E. S. et al. Skeletal health in long-duration astronauts: nature, assessment,
and management recommendations from the NASA Bone Summit. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 28, 1243–1255 (2013).
Label
Osteoclast 
(resorbing 
label)
Label
Osteoblasts
Osteoid
MAR
Adipocytes
Osteoblasts
Osteoid
Ceased 
Bone Formation
Continuous 
Bone Formation
Newly Initiated 
Bone Formation
Figure 4.
Photomicrographs depicting continuous bone formation (ﬂuorochrome label with adjacent osteoblasts) (a), ceased bone formation
(ﬂuorochrome label with no adjacent osteoblasts) (b), and newly initiated bone formation (osteoblasts with no adjacent ﬂuorochrome label)
(c). Also shown are the distance between a ﬂuorochrome label and osteoblast-lined perimeter used to calculate mineral apposition rate (MAR)
(a), an osteoclast resorbing label (b), and marrow adipocytes (c).
Bone loss during spaceﬂight
JA Keune et al
4
npj Microgravity (2016) 16016
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited

2. Sibonga, J. D. Spaceﬂight-induced bone loss: is there an osteoporosis risk?
Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 11, 92–98 (2013).
3. Turner, R. T. Invited review: what do we know about the effects of spaceﬂight
on bone? J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 89, 840–847 (2000).
4. Erben, R. G. Hypothesis: coupling between resorption and formation in cancel-
lous bone remodeling is a mechanically controlled event. Front. Endocrinol.
(Lausanne) 6, 82 (2015).
5. Scheller, E. L. & Rosen, C. J. What's the matter with MAT? Marrow adipose tissue,
metabolism, and skeletal health. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1311, 14–30 (2014).
6. Trudel, G. et al. Bone marrow fat accumulation after 60 days of bed rest persisted
1 year after activities were resumed along with hemopoietic stimulation: the
Women International Space Simulation for Exploration study. J. Appl. Physiol.
(1985) 107, 540–548 (2009).
7. Wronski, T. J., Morey-Holton, E. & Jee, W. S. Cosmos 1129: spaceﬂight and bone
changes. Physiologist 23, S79–S82 (1980).
8. Jee, W. S., Wronski, T. J., Morey, E. R. & Kimmel, D. B. Effects of spaceﬂight on
trabecular bone in rats. Am. J. Physiol. 244, R310–R314 (1983).
9. Verma, S., Rajaratnam, J. H., Denton, J., Hoyland, J. A. & Byers, R. J. Adipocytic
proportion of bone marrow is inversely related to bone formation in osteo-
porosis. J. Clin. Pathol. 55, 693–698 (2002).
10. Gimble, J. M. & Nuttall, M. E. Bone and fat: old questions, new insights. Endocrine
23, 183–188 (2004).
11. Smitka, K. & Maresova, D. Adipose tissue as an endocrine organ: an update on
pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory microenvironment. Prague Med. Rep.
116, 87–111 (2015).
12. Conde, J. et al. Basic aspects of adipokines in bone metabolism. Clin. Rev. Bone
Miner. Metab. 13, 11–19 (2015).
13. Zhang, M. & Turner, R. T. The effects of spaceﬂight on mRNA levels for cytokines in
proximal tibia of ovariectomized rats. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 69, 626–629 (1998).
14. Wronski, T. J., Dann, L. M. & Horner, S. L. Time course of vertebral osteopenia in
ovariectomized rats. Bone 10, 295–301 (1989).
15. Cavolina, J. M. et al. The effects of orbital spaceﬂight on bone histomorphometry and
messenger ribonucleic acid levels for bone matrix proteins and skeletal signaling
peptides in ovariectomized growing rats. Endocrinology 138, 1567–1576 (1997).
16. Vico, L. et al. Effects of weightlessness on bone mass and osteoclast number
in
pregnant
rats
after
a
ﬁve-day
spaceﬂight
(COSMOS
1514).
Bone
8,
95–103 (1987).
17. Wronski, T. J. & Morey, E. R. Skeletal abnormalities in rats induced by simulated
weightlessness. Metab. Bone Dis. Relat. Res. 4, 69–75 (1982).
18. Xiao, L. et al. Large adipocytes function as antigen presenting cells to
activate CD4+ T cells via up-regulating MHCII in obesity. Int. J. Obes. 40,
112–120 (2015).
19. Vidal, C. et al. Interferon gamma inhibits adipogenesis in vitro and prevents
marrow
fat
inﬁltration
in
oophorectomized
mice.
Stem
Cells
30,
1042–1048 (2012).
20. Jee, W. S. & Yao, W. Overview: animal models of osteopenia and osteoporosis.
J. Musculoskelet. Neuronal. Interact. 1, 193–207 (2001).
21. Westerlind, K. C. et al. Estrogen regulates the rate of bone turnover but bone
balance in ovariectomized rats is modulated by prevailing mechanical strain.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 4199–4204 (1997).
22. Morey, E. R., Sabelman, E. E., Turner, R. T. & Baylink, D. J. A new rat model
simulating some aspects of space ﬂight. Physiologist 22, S23–S24 (1979).
23. Hefferan, T. E. et al. Effect of gender on bone turnover in adult rats during
simulated weightlessness. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 95, 1775–1780 (2003).
24. Turner, R. T., Evans, G. L., Cavolina, J. M., Halloran, B. & Morey-Holton, E. Pro-
grammed administration of parathyroid hormone increases bone formation and
reduces bone loss in hindlimb-unloaded ovariectomized rats. Endocrinology 139,
4086–4091 (1998).
25. Turner, R. T., Riggs, B. L. & Spelsberg, T. C. Skeletal effects of estrogen. Endocr. Rev.
15, 275–300 (1994).
26. Ronca, A. E. et al. Effects of sex and gender on adaptations to space:
reproductive health. J. Womens Health (Larchmt) 23, 967–974 (2014).
27. Wronski, T. J., Morey-Holton, E. R., Doty, S. B., Maese, A. C. & Walsh, C. C. Histo-
morphometric analysis of rat skeleton following spaceﬂight. Am. J. Physiol. 252,
R252–R255 (1987).
28. Vico, L., Bourrin, S., Genty, C., Palle, S. & Alexandre, C. Histomorphometric analyses
of cancellous bone from COSMOS 2044 rats. J. Appl. Physiol. (1985) 75,
2203–2208 (1993).
29. Bikle, D. D., Harris, J., Halloran, B. P. & Morey-Holton, E. Altered skeletal pattern of
gene expression in response to spaceﬂight and hindlimb elevation. Am. J. Physiol.
267, E822–E827 (1994).
30. Iwaniec, U. T., Wronski, T. J. & Turner, R. T. Histological analysis of bone. Methods
Mol. Biol. 447, 325–341 (2008).
31. Welch, B. On the comparison of several mean values: an alternative approach.
Biometrika 38, 330–336 (1951).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License. The images
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under
the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license
holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Bone loss during spaceﬂight
JA Keune et al
5
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited
npj Microgravity (2016) 16016
