iScience
Article
Spaceﬂight affects neuronal morphology and
alters transcellular degradation of neuronal debris
in adult Caenorhabditis elegans
Ricardo
Laranjeiro, Girish
Harinath, Amelia
K. Pollard, ...,
Timothy
Etheridge,
Nathaniel J.
Szewczyk, Monica
Driscoll
ricardo_laranjeiro@hotmail.
com
HIGHLIGHTS
Spaceﬂight induces
morphological
remodeling of adult
neurons in C. elegans
Hyperbranching is a
common response of
adult neurons to
spaceﬂight
Neuronal debris
accumulates in the
hypodermis of proteo-
stressed space-ﬂown
animals
Laranjeiro et al., iScience 24,
102105
February 19, 2021 ª 2021 The
Author(s).
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2021.102105
ll
OPEN ACCESS

iScience
Article
Spaceﬂight affects neuronal morphology
and alters transcellular degradation
of neuronal debris in adult Caenorhabditis elegans
Ricardo Laranjeiro,1,7,* Girish Harinath,1 Amelia K. Pollard,2 Christopher J. Gaffney,3,4 Colleen S. Deane,3
Siva A. Vanapalli,5 Timothy Etheridge,3 Nathaniel J. Szewczyk,2,6 and Monica Driscoll1
SUMMARY
Extended space travel is a goal of government space agencies and private com-
panies. However, spaceﬂight poses risks to human health, and the effects on
the nervous system have to be better characterized. Here, we exploited the
unique experimental advantages of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to
explore how spaceﬂight affects adult neurons in vivo. We found that animals
that lived 5 days of adulthood on the International Space Station exhibited hyper-
branching in PVD and touch receptor neurons. We also found that, in the presence
of a neuronal proteotoxic stress, spaceﬂight promotes a remarkable accumula-
tion of neuronal-derived waste in the surrounding tissues, suggesting an impaired
transcellular degradation of debris released from neurons. Our data reveal that
spaceﬂight can signiﬁcantly affect adult neuronal morphology and clearance of
neuronal trash, highlighting the need to carefully assess the risks of long-duration
spaceﬂight on the nervous system and to develop adequate countermeasures for
safe space exploration.
INTRODUCTION
Humankind as long been fascinated by space exploration. Yuri Gagarin ﬁrst showed in 1961 that humans
could survive in space, and Neil Armstrong and Edwin ‘Buzz’ Aldrin became the ﬁrst to walk on the
moon in 1969. Now, the International Space Station (ISS), a multinational collaborative station that orbits
Earth, has been continuously occupied with crew since November 2000. Into the future, both governmental
space agencies and private companies plan to send crewed missions to Mars and beyond. Research to
date, however, makes evident that spaceﬂight poses health risks to the human body, including detrimental
effects to musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and immune systems (Crucian et al., 2018; Fitts et al., 2001; Shen
and Frishman, 2019; Sibonga, 2013; Williams et al., 2009). Particularly striking is the loss of up to 20% of mus-
cle mass in short-duration spaceﬂights (Adams et al., 2003; Edgerton et al., 1995), which can be ameliorated
by regular physical exercise (Loehr et al., 2015). Much less is known about the effects of spaceﬂight on
neuronal morphology and function, especially in vivo and at the single-neuron level. Given the impracti-
cality of conducting such studies in humans, the use of animal models in which detailed high-resolution
neuronal analyses can be performed is invaluable for assessing conserved neuronal responses to space-
ﬂight and developing effective countermeasures to mitigate the consequences of long-duration missions.
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is a genetic model widely used in neurobiology, aging, and stress
research that is amenable for assessing the effects of spaceﬂight on neuronal biology given its unique ad-
vantages: ease of culture in large numbers due to its microscopic size; a transparent body that permits
in vivo imaging of multiple tissues, single cells, and even cellular organelles; and a short lifespan (2–3 weeks)
that allows for even a short-duration spaceﬂight mission to correspond to a large portion of the C. elegans
lifetime. Importantly, the spaceﬂight-induced muscle atrophy observed in humans is conserved in
C. elegans, as several studies reported a downregulation of muscular components in space-ﬂown nema-
todes (Adenle et al., 2009; Higashibata et al., 2006, 2016; Selch et al., 2008). The aging C. elegans muscu-
lature also displays the fundamental characteristics of human sarcopenia (the pervasive age-associated
loss of muscle mass and strength that contributes to human frailty) (Herndon et al., 2002), and physical ex-
ercise in C. elegans mimics human exercise by inducing multi-systemic health beneﬁts (Hartman et al.,
2018; Laranjeiro et al., 2017, 2019). In addition to muscle changes, space-ﬂown C. elegans have altered
1Department of Molecular
Biology and Biochemistry,
Rutgers, The State University
of New Jersey, Piscataway,
NJ 08854, USA
2MRC Versus Arthritis Centre
for Musculoskeletal Ageing
Research and NIHR
Nottingham BRC, University
of Nottingham, Medical
School Royal Derby Hospital,
Derby, DE22 3DT, UK
3Sport and Health Sciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter,
EX1 2LU, UK
4Lancaster Medical School,
Health Innovation One,
Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4AT, UK
5Department of Chemical
Engineering, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, TX
79409, USA
6Ohio Musculoskeletal and
Neurologic Institute and
Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Heritage College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio
University, Athens, OH 45701,
USA
7Lead contact
*Correspondence:
ricardo_laranjeiro@hotmail.
com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2021.102105
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021 ª 2021 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS

metabolism and differential expression of longevity-related genes (Adenle et al., 2009; Higashibata et al.,
2016; Honda et al., 2012; Selch et al., 2008). The C. elegans nervous system is composed of exactly 302 neu-
rons, each one with a well-described morphology. Thus, transgenic nematodes in which neuronal subpop-
ulations are ﬂuorescently labeled allow for in vivo single-neuron assessments that are virtually impossible in
the highly complex mammalian brain.
Here, we show that adult C. elegans that lived 5 days on the ISS exhibit morphological changes in two
distinct types of sensory neurons when compared to ground control animals. We identify hyperbranching
as a common response of adult neurons to spaceﬂight. We also studied proteostressed touch neurons with
a focus on a formerly unrecognized mechanism by which C. elegans neurons can extrude large membrane-
surrounded vesicles that contain neuronal waste (e.g. protein aggregates and damaged organelles) (Ar-
nold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). On Earth, the extruded neurotoxic components are, in most
cases, efﬁciently degraded by the surrounding tissues, which in the case studied is the nematode hypoder-
mis (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). We ﬁnd that, under spaceﬂight conditions, proteos-
tressed neurons are associated with a striking accumulation of neuronal debris in the surrounding tissues
not apparent in ground controls, indicating a severe dysregulation in the ability to clear neuronal waste in
space-ﬂown, middle-aged animals. Our results reveal spaceﬂight-associated challenges to systemic pro-
teostasis and underscore the need to carefully assess the cellular consequences of long-duration space-
ﬂight as strategies to maintain health are developed.
RESULTS
A spaceﬂight protocol that features adult-only C. elegans culture and enables analysis of
microgravity impact on a cohort that spans early adult life to middle age
For all experiments presented in this study, we grew C. elegans in a liquid culture of S-Basal with freeze-dried
E. coli OP50 as a food source. Prior to launch, we cultured synchronized populations of young adult nematodes
thatwe loadedinto polyethylene (PE)bags with 6.5 mL of liquid culture (300 animals/bag) onDecember 2, 2018
(see detailed optimization of culture conditions (Pollard et al., 2020)). Importantly, given our goal of assessing the
effects of spaceﬂight during adult life rather than during animal development, we added 5-ﬂuoro-20-deoxyuri-
dine (FUdR) to the culture bags to suppress production of progeny and to guarantee that the animals we loaded
into the bags would be the same ones we scored upon their return to Earth, as opposed to their progeny. Our
samples were loaded into SpaceX CRS-16, the 16th Commercial Resupply Service mission to the ISS, and
launched on December 5, 2018 aboard a Falcon 9 rocket. SpaceX CRS-16 docked to the ISS on December 8,
2018, and the C. elegans samples, which were kept in cold stowage (8–13C) once introduced into their ﬂight
bags, were transferred to 20C for ﬁve days, beginning on December 9, 2018. After ﬁve days, the C. elegans cul-
ture bags were transferred to 80C and kept frozen until return to Earth (Figure 1). For ground control samples,
we loaded young adult nematodes into PE bags on December 5, 2018 and exposed C. elegans to the same time
Figure 1. A spaceﬂight protocol to assess microgravity impact on C. elegans adult life
Diagram showing the timeline of C. elegans life at 20C, with approximately 2.5 days of embryonic and larval
development and approximately three weeks (21 days) of adulthood. We indicate in red the crucial events in our
experimental design by which we obtained middle-aged animals that experienced most of their physiological aging on
the International Space Station (ISS). Note that C. elegans were kept in cold stowage (8–13C) for approximately 7 days,
relatively low temperatures that signiﬁcantly delayed progression through adult stages. We estimated the cold stowage
period to correspond to approximately 3 days at 20C. After 5 days on the ISS at 20C, samples were frozen and returned
to Earth for analysis.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

A
B
C
D
Figure 2. The PVD dendritic tree is affected by spaceﬂight
(A) Diagram showing the morphology of adult PVD sensory neurons. The characteristic PVD branches that form during
larval development (1–4 branches) to produce the repetitive structural units called menorahs are indicated in red. We
performed all quantiﬁcations in the 100 mm anterior to the PVD cell body as depicted by the blue dashed box. A, anterior;
P, posterior.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
3
iScience
Article

frame/temperaturesasspacesamplesbut maintainedculturesonEarth.Akey aspectofour experimental design
is thus that we generated middle-aged nematodes that experienced most of their physiological aging in micro-
gravity (ISS) vs. normal gravity (Earth).
Spaceﬂight induces morphological remodeling of adult PVD sensory neurons
We started by studying the effects of spaceﬂight in the morphology of PVD sensory neurons, polymodal
nociceptors with spectacular morphologies that sense harsh touch (Way and Chalﬁe, 1989), cold temper-
ature (Chatzigeorgiou et al., 2010), and posture (Albeg et al., 2011). The two PVD neurons (one on the left
side and one on the right side of the body) extend processes that branch to cover most of the body and,
together with FLP neurons in the head, possess the most complex dendritic arborization structure of all
C. elegans neurons (Figure 2A). The highly branched, yet stereotyped, morphology of PVD dendrites arises
sequentially during larval development, with primary (1) branches forming during the L2 stage, secondary
(2) and tertiary (3) branches forming during the L3 stage, and quaternary (4) branches forming during the
early L4 stage (Oren-Suissa et al., 2010). By the late L4 stage, PVD patterning is completed, and the repet-
itive structural units resembling candelabras or menorahs become apparent (Figure 2A).
We used a C. elegans strain in which PVD neurons express a translational fusion of transmembrane protein
DES-2 and green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) (DES-2::GFP) (Oren-Suissa et al., 2010). All tiers of the PVD den-
drites are well visualized by GFP in this strain, and approaches toward quantitative imaging of branching
have been published (Kravtsov et al., 2017; Oren-Suissa et al., 2010, 2017). We compared PVD neurons
from middle-aged space-ﬂown vs. ground control animals by scoring 1–4 branch structures. We found
that the space-ﬂown PVD neurons did not degenerate en masse nor did they exhibit major dendritic
gaps relative to ground control PVD neurons (n = 51–56 PVD neurons/condition) (Figures 2B and 2C). How-
ever, when we carefully quantiﬁed the number of branches and other menorah-related phenotypes in a
100-mm domain anterior to the PVD soma (Figure 2A), we registered consistent differences between control
and spaceﬂight animals. More speciﬁcally, space-ﬂown animals exhibited increased numbers of 2 and 3
branches, whereas the number of 4 branches remained constant between control and spaceﬂight animals
(Figure 2D), indicating a plastic morphological restructuring during adult life with outcome that differs
consequent to microgravity experience.
On Earth, the PVD dendritic pattern is established during larval stages, but adult neurons still exhibit a
limited plasticity of the dendritic trees, with dynamic growth and retraction events occurring during lifetime
(Kravtsov et al., 2017). Moreover, the PVD dendritic trees show age-dependent hyperbranching, disorga-
nization, and loss of self-avoidance within tree branches (Kravtsov et al., 2017). Whether these changes
reﬂect deleterious aspects of aging or adaptive processes as the animal grows remains unclear. With re-
gard to spaceﬂight samples, our quantiﬁcation of the number of extra branches derived from 4 branches
(5, 6, and 7 branches) and the number of ectopic branches (ectopic 2, 3, and 4) found that space-ﬂown
animals displayed an increased number of 5 branches (Figure 3A) and ectopic 3 branches (Figure 3B) rela-
tive to ground control animals. Retrograde branches (4 or higher-order branches that migrate toward the
3 branch by forming a hook) were also present at signiﬁcantly higher numbers in spaceﬂight PVD neurons
when compared to control counterparts (Figure 3C). We observed that spaceﬂight increased the propor-
tion of disorganized menorahs (menorahs with extra/ectopic branches) (Figure 3D) and the proportion of
self-avoidance defects (no gap in 3 branch between adjacent menorahs) (Figure 3E). PVD dendrites also
exhibit age-associated degeneration characterized by the appearance of bead- or bubble-like structures
along the dendrites, which are enriched in autophagosomes and fragmented microtubules (E et al.,
2018). We focused on this morphological feature but found no difference in the number of beads/bubbles
present in PVD dendrites of space-ﬂown animals relative to ground control animals (Figure 3F).
Overall, our data reveal that spaceﬂight induces signiﬁcant remodeling of the PVD dendritic tree in adult
C. elegans without promoting neurodegeneration. Importantly, the morphological changes we report here
Figure 2. Continued
(B and C) Representative maximum intensity projection confocal images of ground control (B) and spaceﬂight (C) PVD
neurons from DES-2::GFP animals. Scale bars, 10 mm.
(D) Number of 2, 3, and 4 branches in ground control and spaceﬂight PVD neurons. Number of animals used for
analysis: nControl = 51, nSpace = 56. We determined statistical signiﬁcance by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test. *p %
0.05, **p % 0.01. Data are presented as mean G standard error of the mean.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 3. Spaceﬂight promotes hyperbranching, disorganization, and self-avoidance defects in PVD sensory
neurons
(A–F) Quantiﬁcations in ground control and spaceﬂight PVD neurons of 5, 6, and 7 branches (A), ectopic 2, ectopic 3,
and ectopic 4 branches (B), retrograde branches (C), disorganized menorahs (D), self-avoidance defects (E), and beads/
bubbles (F). We highlight each PVD remodeling phenotype with a diagram (left panel) and a representative confocal
image from DES-2::GFP animals (center panel). Number of animals used for analysis in A–E: nControl = 51, nSpace = 56.
Number of animals used for analysis in F: nControl = 12, nSpace = 12 (we randomly selected 12 ground control and
spaceﬂight animals for scoring; each point represents a single animal). We determined statistical signiﬁcance by unpaired
two-tailed Student’s t test (A–C, F) and by Fisher’s exact test (D, E). *p % 0.05, **p % 0.01, ***p % 0.001. Data are
presented as mean G standard error of the mean.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
5
iScience
Article

for sensory neurons occurred during adult life, indicating that microgravity can inﬂuence the morphology of
adult neurons.
Spaceﬂight promotes modest morphological changes in adult touch receptor neurons
The complex dendritic tree of PVD neurons contrasts with the simple morphology of a single unbranched
process adopted by most C. elegans neurons (White et al., 1986). The six touch receptor neurons (AVM,
ALML, ALMR, PVM, PLML, and PLMR) mediate the response to gentle touch, with each extending a single
major dendritic process anteriorly (Chalﬁe and Sulston, 1981) (Figure 4A). We sought to investigate the ef-
fects of spaceﬂight on touch receptor neuron morphology by studying a C. elegans strain in which touch
receptor neurons are speciﬁcally labeled with soluble GFP (Pmec-4GFP).
We found that middle-aged nematodes that lived ﬁve days of adulthood on the ISS exhibited touch recep-
tor neurons with an overall morphology similar to ground control animals, with no obvious degeneration,
dendritic gaps, or soma/process mislocalization (n = 54–64 of each touch receptor neuron/condition) (Fig-
ures 4B and 4C). For a detailed morphological characterization of each neuron, we quantiﬁed age-depen-
dent morphological changes previously reported for touch receptor neurons (Toth et al., 2012), including
new branches that extend from the main process (‘‘branches’’) and new processes emerging from the soma
(‘‘outgrowths’’) (Figure 4D). We observed an overall trend in space-ﬂown animals for increased number of
branches in all six touch receptor neurons (statistically signiﬁcant for ALMR and PLML) relative to ground
control animals (Figure 4E), whereas we found the number of outgrowths was generally unchanged by
spaceﬂight (except for PVM) (Figure 4F). Thus, C. elegans adult touch receptor neurons undergo minor
structural changes consequent to space travel. Together, our data reveal that spaceﬂight during adult
life does not promote major morphological changes in touch receptor neurons. Still, the hyperbranching
phenotype detected in speciﬁc adult touch receptor neurons and the morphological changes observed in
adult PVD neurons suggest that modest neuronal restructuring might constitute a general neuronal
response to microgravity and/or other stresses associated with spaceﬂight.
Spaceﬂight induces a distinctive response to neuronal mCherry extrusion
Spaceﬂight includes novel stresses experienced by organisms during lift-off/reentry and extended micro-
gravity periods, and some of these stresses have been suggested to contribute to accelerated aging (De-
montis et al., 2017). Among the many stress response pathways activated and compromised by aging are
proteostasis pathways such as autophagy and protein degradation processes (Kaushik and Cuervo, 2015).
Although ﬂuxes through such pathways are difﬁcult to measure in spaceﬂight samples, we considered
some physical readouts thought to reﬂect proteostasis status.
Expression of GFP in touch receptor neurons can induce high-intensity ﬂuorescent puncta in the soma (Fig-
ure 4D). We found that the absolute numbers of GFP puncta in touch neurons did not differ between mid-
dle-aged nematodes on Earth and the ones that spent the corresponding ﬁve days on the ISS (Figure S1A).
However, we did observe a trend in space-ﬂown animals for an increased proportion of large GFP puncta
(diameter R0.9 mm) in the soma of touch receptor neurons as compared to ground control animals (Fig-
ure S1B). Although we cannot distinguish whether the touch neuron puncta correspond to aggregates,
developing aggresomes, or liquid phase droplets, the differential handling of introduced GFP suggests
physiological differences between Earth and spaceﬂight neurons.
We also reasoned that we might readily evaluate one proteostress response using ﬂuorescence imaging of
marked neurons – the extrusion of neuronal garbage. Touch receptor neurons can extrude large mem-
brane-surrounded vesicles called exophers that contain protein aggregates and organelles (Melentijevic
et al., 2017) (Figure 4D). Exopher production increases under enhanced proteostress, as well as under envi-
ronmental stresses such as elevated superoxide production (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017),
possibly as a conserved protective mechanism of proteostasis. Under standard conditions, exopher pro-
duction in GFP-labeled neurons is a relatively rare event (Melentijevic et al., 2017). We found that space-
ﬂight did not signiﬁcantly increase overall exopher detection in touch receptor neurons of Pmec-4GFP an-
imals (Figure 4G). We did, however, note an interesting switch in the apparent rates of exopher
production in individual touch receptor neurons. On Earth, adult ALMR neurons reproducibly produce
more baseline exophers than other neurons, including the left side counterpart ALML (Melentijevic
et al., 2017), but in spaceﬂight animals, left side ALML produced more baseline exophers (Figure 4G).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 4. Spaceﬂight promotes modest morphological changes in adult touch receptor neurons
(A) GFP-labeled touch receptor neurons in a young adult Pmec-4GFP animal. Image adapted from www.wormatlas.org.
NR, nerve ring; VNC, ventral nerve cord.
(B and C) Representative confocal images of ground control (B) and spaceﬂight (C) Pmec-4GFP animals. Scale bars, 10 mm.
(D) Diagram showing a touch receptor neuron with a branch, an outgrowth, high-intensity ﬂuorescent puncta in the cell
body, and an exopher.
(E–G) Quantiﬁcations in ground control and spaceﬂight Pmec-4GFP animals of the number of branches (E), outgrowths (F),
and exophers (G) in each of the six touch receptor neurons. We highlight each touch receptor neuron phenotype with a
representative confocal image from Pmec-4GFP animals. Number of touch receptor neurons used for analysis: nControl =
54–61, nSpace = 60–64. Note that the different number of neurons used for analysis in each condition derives from the fact
that, depending on the animal position during imaging, not all touch receptor neurons are visible in certain animals. We
determined statistical signiﬁcance by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test. *p % 0.05, ***p % 0.001. Data are presented as
mean G standard error of the mean.
See also Figure S1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
7
iScience
Article

Our observations raise the possibility that maintained gravitational forces may inﬂuence left/right asymme-
tries associated with stresses or their management in particular neurons.
GFP-expressing touch receptor neurons have been studied extensively and are not thought to experience
any particular stress as a consequence of the GFP expression (Chalﬁe et al., 1994; Herndon et al., 2002).
Other transgenically supplied reporters such as mCherry can appear disruptive to normal physiology
and are associated with an enhanced level of selective extrusion in exophers (Melentijevic et al., 2017).
We wondered whether ‘‘at risk’’ neurons, pre-sensitized by the genetic introduction of a noxious
mCherry-induced proteostress, might be impacted by spaceﬂight. Thus, we examined space-ﬂown animals
of a strain that over-produces an mCherry reporter well characterized to elevate the production of exo-
phers in touch receptor neurons (Pmec-4mCherry1) (Melentijevic et al., 2017). We examined the neuronal
morphology, apparent protein aggregation, and exopher-genesis in the presence of the mCherry stressor.
We found that touch receptor neurons of space-ﬂown Pmec-4mCherry1 animals exhibited a generally
normal neuronal morphology (n = 42–66 of each touch receptor neuron/condition). We observed a trend
in spaceﬂight animals for increased number of mCherry foci in the soma of speciﬁc touch receptor neurons
(AVM, ALMR, PLML, and statistically signiﬁcant in PLMR) relative to ground control animals (Figure S2A),
whereas we detected no signiﬁcant differences in the proportion of large internal mCherry foci (diameter
R0.9 mm) between both conditions (Figure S2B). We found no signiﬁcant differences in the absolute num-
ber of exophers present in middle-aged control vs. spaceﬂight touch neurons (Figure S2C).
We did, however, observe a striking difference in mCherry reporter signal present outside the touch recep-
tor neurons: a remarkably large proportion of Pmec-4mCherry1 animals that spent 5 days of adulthood on
the ISS contained numerous mCherry-ﬂuorescent structures throughout the body, a phenotype we never
observed in ground control animals (Figures 5A, 5B, and S3). While exophers produced by ground control
animals are found almost exclusively near touch receptor neuron cell bodies, in limited numbers (one or
two exophers produced at the most per neuron), and with characteristic sizes (Arnold et al., 2020; Melenti-
jevic et al., 2017), ﬂuorescent structures in space-ﬂown animals ranged from small particles to large
rounded structures that could appear as a continuous layer covering multiple regions of the body (Figures
5B and S3).
C. elegans touch receptor neurons run through and are fully surrounded by hypodermal tissue. When exo-
phers are extruded, they must therefore enter the hypodermis, which attempts digestion of exopher con-
tents via its extensive lysosomal network. mCherry exopher contents that cannot be digested in the sur-
rounding hypodermis are eventually extruded from the hypodermis into the C. elegans pseudocoelom.
A
B
Figure 5. Spaceﬂight leads to accumulation of neuronal-derived mCherry throughout the body of middle-aged
nematodes
(A and B) Representative confocal images of ground control (A) and spaceﬂight (B) Pmec-4mCherry1 animals. Scale bars,
10 mm.
See also Figures S2 and S3.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

Materials ﬂoating through the pseudocoelom can be taken up by scavenger cells called coelomocytes (Ar-
nold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). During the process of transit through the hypodermis, the
mCherry exopher contents often become dispersed in the hypodermal lysosomal network, appearing as
small ﬂuorescent particles (we refer to this as a ‘‘Starry Night’’ phenotype) (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic
et al., 2017). The unexpected distribution of ﬂuorescence that we observed in spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1
animals appears comprised of two main components (Figure 6A): small ﬂuorescent particles resembling
the Starry Night phenotype and large rounded ﬂuorescent structures (‘‘spaceﬂight vesicles’’ or ‘‘sVesicles’’)
that we have not previously found in this C. elegans strain under standard culture conditions (even in much
older adults) (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). These large rounded structures have the appear-
ance of the enlarged hypodermal lysosomes that can be found in C. elegans mutants defective in lysosomal
function and assembly (Li et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019).
We characterized the presence and location of both Starry Night and sVesicles in our samples. We found a
striking increase in the proportion of animals with Starry Night in control vs. spaceﬂight (7% vs. 67%) (Fig-
ure 6B). In ground control animals, we always found Starry Night in the mid-body and in the hypodermis
(peripheral layer surrounding the body) (Figures 6C and 6D). In space-ﬂown animals, we still found Starry
Night predominantly in the mid-body, but in approximately half of the cases, the Starry Night dispersed
ﬂuorescence expanded into the anterior and/or the posterior region of the body (Figure 6C). Regarding
tissue location, we detected that Starry Night after spaceﬂight was always present in the hypodermis
(Videos S1 and S2) but could also spread into the intestine (15% of animals) or other tissues (48% of animals)
(Figure 6D). We did not observe sVesicles in any of the 72 ground control animals analyzed, whereas 52 out
of the 83 space-ﬂown animals (63%) exhibited sVesicles (Figure 6E). The location distribution of sVesicles in
spaceﬂight animals was similar to Starry Night location, with sVesicles found predominantly in the mid-
body but also in the anterior and posterior regions of the body (Figure 6F), and the primarily hypodermal
location (Videos S1 and S2) extended into the intestine (7% of animals) or other tissues (56% of animals)
(Figure 6G). Despite the extensive mCherry ﬂuorescence found outside the touch receptor neurons in
spaceﬂight animals, we rarely observed mCherry ﬂuorescence in coelomocytes in this sample (only 1 out
of 56 animals). The similar distribution patterns of Starry Night and sVesicles, together with the fact that
96% of the animals that exhibited sVesicles also had Starry Night, strongly support a link between both
phenomena.
We tried to identify the sVesicles found in spaceﬂight nematodes by performing antibody staining for the
lysosomal marker LMP-1 but were unable to get speciﬁc staining, possibly due to the paraformaldehyde
ﬁxation that we had to perform when thawing the frozen nematodes (essential to maintain a strong ﬂuores-
cence from reporters). Moreover, it appeared that the sVesicles could be readily disrupted as we found that
alternative ﬁxation methods (e.g. methanol and acetic acid) led to the disappearance of most mCherry ﬂuo-
rescence outside the touch receptor neurons. The fragility of the sVesicle structures limited our ability to
deﬁnitively conﬁrm the nature of the hypodermal structures we observed. We did ﬁnd that the ﬂuorescence
intensity of the sVesicles varied greatly, ranging from a bright to a diffuse, dim ﬂuorescence (Figure 6H),
which is consistent with sVesicles being at different stages of lysosomal degradation.
We were fortunate that an unanticipated feature of the ﬂight population enabled us to compare mCherry
distribution in some escaper progeny in the culture bag from the ISS. We found that despite our use of
FUdR to limit reproduction, some progeny were able to develop up to young adulthood. We could easily
identify these animals from older adults by their reduced size. Young adult animals present in the same cul-
ture bag as the middle-aged adults that were our major focus exhibited the ﬂuorescent structures at
extremely low levels (Figure S4), suggesting that the dramatic sVesicle proﬁles in the hypodermis could
be age dependent. We cannot rule out, however, that a variable introduced during development in space-
ﬂight could be responsible for the lack of the large sVesicle pattern in younger animals.
Overall, our data reveal that, in the presence of an internal cell-speciﬁc proteotoxic stress (i.e., mCherry
overexpression in touch receptor neurons), spaceﬂight is associated with signiﬁcant extrusion of the offen-
sive protein in middle-aged touch receptor neurons. Unexpectedly, the extruded material appears to
become stuck in the hypodermal lysosomal network, and the lysosomal network adopts a morphology
similar to that observed when lysosomes are unable to degrade their substrates. Our data suggest that
in microgravity, extruded neuronal garbage is not handled as efﬁciently by the neighboring cell that col-
lects neuronal debris and attempts degradation.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
9
iScience
Article

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 6. Spaceﬂight induces a distinctive hypodermal response to neuronal mCherry extrusion
(A) Confocal image of a spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animal in which we identiﬁed Starry Night and spaceﬂight vesicles
(sVesicles) as two distinct ﬂuorescent components. Scale bar, 10 mm.
(B) Proportion of ground control and spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals with/without Starry Night. Number of animals
used for analysis: nControl = 72, nSpace = 83. We determined statistical signiﬁcance by Fisher’s exact test. ****p % 0.0001.
(C and D) Location of Starry Night in ground control and spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals in the anterior-posterior
body axis (C) and in different tissues (D). Number of animals used for analysis: nControl = 5, nSpace = 33.
(E) Proportion of ground control and spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals with/without sVesicles. Number of animals used
for analysis: nControl = 72, nSpace = 83. We determined statistical signiﬁcance by Fisher’s exact test. ****p % 0.0001.
(F and G) Location of sVesicles in spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals in the anterior-posterior body axis (F) and in
different tissues (G). Number of animals used for analysis: nSpace = 27. We scored Starry Night and sVesicles as ‘‘anterior’’ if
location was anterior to the AVM neuron, ‘‘mid’’ if location was in between the AVM and the PVM neurons, and ‘‘posterior’’
if location was posterior to the PVM neuron. We scored tissue location by imaging different planes on each animal;
‘‘hypodermal’’ corresponded to the peripheral layer surrounding the body, ‘‘intestinal’’ corresponded to the cells
surrounding the intestinal lumen, and ‘‘other’’ corresponded to locations in the body not easily identiﬁable. We randomly
selected a subgroup of spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals to score the location of Starry Night and sVesicles in the
anterior-posterior body axis and in different tissues.
(H) Confocal image of a spaceﬂight Pmec-4mCherry1 animal showing the variation in ﬂuorescence intensity of sVesicles.
Scale bar, 10 mm.
See also Figure S4.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

Future experiments will be necessary to determine the exact mechanism causing mCherry accumulation in
large quantities in multiple tissues of C. elegans consequent to spaceﬂight. Still, it is interesting that our
results suggest that spaceﬂight can increase mCherry spread from touch receptor neurons to neighboring
tissues (via exophers and/or unknown mechanisms) and that these signiﬁcant extrusions are not processed
in neighboring tissues as occurs on Earth. The abnormal ﬂuorescent structures observed primarily in the
hypodermis suggest that the degradative pathways of middle-aged animals may become overwhelmed
in response to spaceﬂight with the resulting inability to quickly clear neuronal trash. Thus, in upcoming
spaceﬂight missions, it will be fascinating to speciﬁcally track the hypodermal lysosomal network and to
determine whether other proteostressors such as aggregation-prone human neurodegenerative disease
proteins tau, amyloid beta, huntingtin, or alpha-synuclein promote similar distinctive outcomes.
DISCUSSION
Spaceﬂight has been shown to induce adverse effects on the human body at multiple levels, including in
musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, and immune systems (Crucian et al., 2018; Fitts et al., 2001; Shen and Frish-
man, 2019; Sibonga, 2013; Williams et al., 2009). However, the effect of spaceﬂight on neuronal
morphology and function, especially in vivo, is largely unknown. In this study, we took advantage of the
unique characteristics of the nematode C. elegans (e.g. ease of culture in large numbers and transparent
body allowing for in vivo imaging of ﬂuorescently labeled transgenic lines) to address how spaceﬂight af-
fects the morphology of different adult neurons and the response to a neuronal proteotoxic stress. We
show that spaceﬂight induces extensive remodeling of the PVD dendritic tree in adult C. elegans relative
to ground control animals, whereas touch receptor neurons exhibit modest morphological changes in
response to spaceﬂight. Importantly, hyperbranching is a consistent response to spaceﬂight between
different adult neuron types. We also report on a striking difference in the ability to respond to a neuronal
proteostress (i.e., mCherry overexpression) in spaceﬂight vs. Earth samples, in which adults that aged on
the ISS exhibited accumulated extruded neuronal garbage outside the neurons, distributed in neighboring
tissues. Our observations raise the intriguing possibility that spaceﬂight may impair neuronal proteostasis/
clearance pathways, which may hold signiﬁcant health implications for long-duration spaceﬂights.
Spaceﬂight promotes remodeling of complex adult dendritic trees
We found that spaceﬂight promoted hyperbranching, disorganization, and loss of self-avoidance in mid-
dle-aged PVD neurons. These phenotypes have been shown to increase during aging in C. elegans (Kravt-
sov et al., 2017), raising the possibility that space-ﬂown animals experienced accelerated aging compared
to ground control counterparts. However, we observed no increase in space-ﬂown animals of age-associ-
ated PVD degeneration (i.e. number of beads/bubbles), which is tightly linked to the functional aging of
PVD neurons (E et al., 2018). Adult animals with disorganized PVD dendritic trees rarely show defects in
response to harsh touch (E et al., 2018; Kravtsov et al., 2017), suggesting that changes in dendritic architec-
ture are not necessarily a deleterious aspect of aging but rather might be part of normal neuronal mainte-
nance and an adaptive response to intrinsic/extrinsic cues. Furthermore, in other models, most physiolog-
ical changes induced by spaceﬂight are reversed upon return to Earth and therefore can be considered
physiological adaptations to the spaceﬂight environment (Garrett-Bakelman et al., 2019; Honda et al.,
2014; Williams et al., 2009). Thus, we hypothesize that the PVD remodeling we describe here is more likely
an adaptive change to spaceﬂight conditions rather than an overall increase in aging rate. Testing this hy-
pothesis is a challenge for spaceﬂight experiments as the C. elegans lifespan is shorter than typical
missions.
A complex cross talk between muscle, skin (hypodermis), and PVD neurons deﬁnes the pattern of higher-
order branches in the PVD dendritic tree (Diaz-Balzac et al., 2016; Liang et al., 2015; Salzberg et al., 2013;
Yang and Chien, 2019; Zhu et al., 2017). Brieﬂy, the extracellular matrix protein UNC-52/Perlecan forms reg-
ular stripes by following the location of the dense bodies of sarcomeres and is essential for the formation of
regular hypodermal hemidesmosomes, which are the attachments that mechanically link the hypodermis to
the muscle. The intermediate ﬁlament MUA-6, which is a component of the hemidesmosome, patterns the
transmembrane cell adhesion molecule SAX-7/L1CAM in hypodermal stripes by locally excluding SAX-7
from the regions where MUA-6 is present. Then, SAX-7 physically interacts with the transmembrane recep-
tor DMA-1 in PVD neurons to instruct the growth of 4 branches. Given the well-established and conserved
role of spaceﬂight in muscle degeneration (Adenle et al., 2009; Fitts et al., 2001; Higashibata et al., 2016;
Williams et al., 2009), we propose that PVD dendritic morphology in space-ﬂown C. elegans may be indi-
rectly affected by changes at the body wall muscle level. In fact, microgravity in C. elegans has been shown
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
11
iScience
Article

to downregulate the expression of multiple muscle dense body genes and intermediate ﬁlament genes,
including mua-6 (Higashibata et al., 2016). Areas where MUA-6 is absent have abnormally shaped PVD den-
drites (Liang et al., 2015), suggesting that the downregulation of muscle structural genes together with
mua-6 by microgravity could contribute to the changes we observed in space-ﬂown PVD neurons, partic-
ularly the hyperbranching, menorah disorganization, and increase in retrograde branches.
Spaceﬂight has also been suggested to reduce insulin signaling in C. elegans (Honda et al., 2012; Selch
et al., 2008), whereas the insulin/IGF-1 receptor daf-2 mutant exhibits an increase in PVD 2 branches
(Gioran et al., 2014) and self-avoidance defects (Kravtsov et al., 2017). Thus, a putative modulation in insulin
signaling in space-ﬂown C. elegans might contribute to some of the PVD remodeling phenotypes that we
describe in this study.
Hyperbranching may be a conserved response of adult neurons to spaceﬂight
We found that space-ﬂown C. elegans exhibited touch receptor neurons with modest morphological
changes (i.e., hyperbranching) when compared to ground control animals. Interestingly, impaired mito-
chondrial respiration increases branching in both touch receptor neurons and PVD neurons (Gioran
et al., 2014), akin to our observations after spaceﬂight. Moreover, spaceﬂight in C. elegans has been shown
to induce a metabolic shift (Adenle et al., 2009; Selch et al., 2008) and decrease the expression of numerous
enzymes involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and of all electron transport chain complexes (Higashibata
et al., 2016), strongly indicating that mitochondrial respiration is reduced during spaceﬂight. Therefore,
changes in mitochondrial function during spaceﬂight may contribute to the hyperbranching phenotype
that we described in different adult neuronal cell types.
The subtle morphological changes induced by spaceﬂight in touch receptor neurons contrasted with an
extensive remodeling of the PVD dendritic tree. This difference in response to spaceﬂight can be explain
by the innate morphology of each neuron (i.e., the highly branched dendritic tree of PVD neurons allows for
the detection of multiple morphological abnormalities vs. a single unbranched process of touch receptor
neurons), the stimuli sensed by each neuron (i.e., PVD neurons may sense microgravity more directly than
touch receptor neurons given their role in proprioception (Albeg et al., 2011)), and/or the fact that PVD
morphology is indirectly affected by changes at the muscle level (as discussed previously). Despite the dif-
ferences between neuron types, our results suggest hyperbranching as a common neuronal adaptive
response to spaceﬂight. This response may in fact be conserved from C. elegans to mammals given that
Septin 7, a GTP-binding protein critical for dendrite branching (Xie et al., 2007), has been shown to be
signiﬁcantly upregulated in the brain of mice exposed to the ISS environment for 3 months (Santucci
et al., 2012).
Clearance of neuronal waste is not affected by spaceﬂight in normal conditions
In addition to neuronal morphological changes, we also assessed how spaceﬂight modulated the extrusion
of neuronal garbage by touch receptor neurons, with a focus on the potential extrusion of large membrane-
surrounded vesicles called exophers (Melentijevic et al., 2017). We found that GFP-labeled touch receptor
neurons, which are not thought to be stressed by transgene expression, exhibited an overall similar number
of detectable exophers in middle-aged animals exposed to the ISS vs. Earth environment. It is interesting
that for GFP-labeled anterior touch neurons, we measured a difference in the left-right asymmetry in exo-
pher production levels. On Earth, the ALM neuron on the right side of the body (ALMR) consistently pro-
duces more exophers than the left side ALM neuron (ALML) (Melentijevic et al., 2017). However, in space-
ﬂown animals, we observed a reversal in exopher-genesis rate between ALMR and ALML neurons.
Although the reason underlying this reversal is unclear, a recent study of reproducible transcriptomic
changes in space-ﬂown C. elegans (Willis et al., 2020) identiﬁed downregulated genes predicted to be un-
der the control of the transcription factor NSY-7, which is involved in determination of neuronal left/right
asymmetry (Lesch et al., 2009). Together, these results suggest that spaceﬂight may inﬂuence the left/right
asymmetries in the C. elegans nervous system and potentially affect side-speciﬁc neuronal functions.
Exopher production is a relatively rare event under normal conditions (i.e., without a proteotoxic stress),
and the majority of exophers are produced on adult days 2 and 3, followed by a reduction in abundance
during midlife (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). In this study, we quantiﬁed the number of exo-
phers present in middle-aged animals, a time window several days past the peak in exopher-genesis, and
therefore, we cannot deﬁnitively draw comparisons to Earth samples regarding the effect of spaceﬂight on
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

exopher production. We can, however, conclude that spaceﬂight did not induce any exopher-clearance
problems in animals with GFP-labeled touch receptor neurons since we observed no abnormal accumula-
tion of GFP ﬂuorescence in middle-aged C. elegans.
Debris originating in neurons accumulates in surrounding tissues of space-ﬂown animals in
the presence of a proteotoxic stress
In the presence of a neuronal proteotoxic stress (i.e., in a line overexpressing mCherry in touch receptor
neurons), we observed a surprising accumulation of mCherry ﬂuorescence in the hypodermis (and other
tissues) of space-ﬂown animals. Given that mCherry is expressed exclusively in the touch receptor neurons,
this ﬂuorescence accumulation in the hypodermis strongly supports that mCherry extruded from touch re-
ceptor neurons by exophers and/or other processes is not efﬁciently cleared in the surrounding hypoder-
mal tissue in space-ﬂown animals.
A major question that arises from our results is whether spaceﬂight increases the extrusion of neuronal trash
in proteotoxic conditions or decreases the degradative/clearance ability of non-neuronal neighboring tis-
sues (or a combination of both). We found a modest increase in the number of mCherry foci in the soma of
certain touch receptor neurons exposed to the ISS environment, suggesting that neuronal protein aggre-
gation may be enhanced by spaceﬂight. This, in turn, could increase the extrusion of neuronal trash (e.g.
aggregates) through exophers. We did not identify more exophers in space-ﬂown, mCherry-expressing
touch receptor neurons when compared to ground control neurons, but, as discussed above, our quanti-
ﬁcation occurred in middle-aged animals rather than at the peak of exopher-genesis (adult days 2 and 3).
Additionally, given that exopher identiﬁcation is based on the presence of large ﬂuorescent vesicles nearby
the neuron cell body, we likely missed several exophers in space-ﬂown Pmec-4mCherry1 animals due to
masking by all the extra ﬂuorescence present. Regardless of a putative increase in neuronal trash extrusion
by spaceﬂight, the remarkable mCherry accumulation throughout the body of over 60% of the space-ﬂown
animals indicates to us that the transcellular degradation/management of neuronal trash is severely
compromised in the ISS environment.
In mammals, glial cells play a vital role in the central nervous system in the elimination of waste proteins and
metabolites produced by neurons (Jessen et al., 2015; Lim and Yue, 2015; Weber and Barros, 2015). These
non-neuronal cells maintain homeostasis in the brain, and their dysregulation can contribute to the devel-
opment of neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer disease. In fact, microglia and astrocytes play
critical roles in the regulation of amyloid-beta (Ab) clearance and degradation (Ries and Sastre, 2016). In the
case of C. elegans, touch receptor neurons are fully surrounded by hypodermal tissue, and therefore, the
hypodermis assumes an analogous function to mammalian glia regarding the clearance of neuronal waste.
Even though we were unable to deﬁnitively identify the hypodermal structures in which mCherry ﬂuores-
cence accumulates in response to spaceﬂight, it is striking that the large rounded ﬂuorescent structures
(sVesicles) resemble enlarged hypodermal lysosomes found in animals defective in lysosomal function
and assembly (Li et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019). Moreover, the small ﬂuorescent particles
(Starry Night) have been previously described as neuron-derived mCherry that becomes dispersed in the
hypodermal lysosomal network (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). Thus, our results suggest that
transcellular management of neuronal waste by the hypodermis is defective in space-ﬂown animals, lead-
ing to accumulation of impaired degradative organelles such as lysosomes. Our observations also suggest
that the inability to efﬁciently clear neuronal trash is associated with the aging process given the absence of
ﬂuorescence accumulation in space-ﬂown young adult animals that were escapers in our study.
On Earth, mCherry extruded from neurons that cannot be digested by the hypodermis is re-released by the
hypodermis into the C. elegans pseudocoelom and taken up for degradation by scavenger cells called coe-
lomocytes (Arnold et al., 2020; Melentijevic et al., 2017). Interestingly, despite the accumulation of mCherry
throughout the body of space-ﬂown animals, we rarely found mCherry ﬂuorescence in coelomocytes, sug-
gesting a defect in hypodermal re-release or an uptake problem in coelomocytes. Alternatively, a distinct
debris uptake pathway in other tissues like intestine might be induced in response to spaceﬂight, so that
extruded material is handled differently from neuronal waste on Earth.
Autophagy is a conserved lysosomal-dependent degradative pathway that is critical for cellular homeosta-
sis and has been shown to increase in response to spaceﬂight or simulated microgravity in multiple cell
types, such as muscle (Ryu et al., 2014), bone (Sambandam et al., 2014), liver (Blaber et al., 2017), kidney
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
13
iScience
Article

(Ryu et al., 2014), endothelial (Locatelli et al., 2020), and cancer (Ferranti et al., 2014; Fukazawa et al., 2019;
Jeong et al., 2018) cells. However, to the best of our knowledge, nothing is known about the effect of space-
ﬂight on autophagy or other degradative pathways in glial cells. Our results may even be consistent with an
increase in autophagy markers in the hypodermis of space-ﬂown animals, but the ﬁnal steps of degradation
seem to stall at some point leading to the accumulation of waste-ﬁlled vesicles. Future missions should
address the impact of spaceﬂight on glial clearance pathways, particularly in the presence of proteostres-
sors such as neurodegenerative disease proteins tau, Ab, huntingtin, or alpha-synuclein.
What are the consequences of spaceﬂight to neuronal function?
In this study, we show that spaceﬂight can promote signiﬁcant morphological changes in adult neurons and
affect the clearance of neuronal trash from the surrounding tissues. Despite microgravity being the major
difference experienced by space-ﬂown animals compared to ground control animals, we cannot exclude
other environmental factors (e.g. radiation) as partially responsible for the observed phenotypes. The
impact of these changes to neuronal function remains in question; however, our results raise the intriguing
possibility that long-duration spaceﬂights may affect brain function due to neuronal morphological remod-
eling and deﬁcits in waste degradation. Interestingly, the recent National Aeronautics and Space Admin-
istration (NASA) twins study found that the twin astronaut that spent 1 year onboard the ISS exhibited post-
ﬂight decline in cognitive performance when compared to his identical brother who remained on Earth
(Garrett-Bakelman et al., 2019). Future missions will need to carefully address the impact of spaceﬂight
on overall brain structure and function to properly assess the risks of long-duration missions planned for
the medium future to take humans to Mars and beyond.
Limitations of the study
Our study reveals how spaceﬂight can affect adult neuronal morphology and the response to extruded
neuronal waste. However, we were unable to mechanistically dissect these phenotypes given the inability
to send new samples to the ISS on a regular basis. Future missions will be essential to clarify how consistent
these adaptations to spaceﬂight are and to further explore the molecular, cellular, and tissue responses to
spaceﬂight. In addition, even though C. elegans provides unique opportunities to identify in vivo single-
neuron responses to spaceﬂight, future studies in mammalian models and ultimately in humans will be
required to assess the risks of long-duration spaceﬂight and to develop countermeasures for safe space
exploration.
Resource availability
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by
the lead contact, Ricardo Laranjeiro (ricardo_laranjeiro@hotmail.com).
Material availability
All unique strains generated in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.
Data and code availability
No large-scale data sets or codes were generated or analyzed in this study. We deposited detailed tem-
perature recordings from spaceﬂight and control samples in Harvard Dataverse: https://doi.org/10.
7910/DVN/ATOJCJ. The raw data supporting the current study are available from the lead contact upon
request.
METHODS
All methods can be found in the accompanying Transparent methods supplemental ﬁle.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102105.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank NASA’s Cold Stowage team (payload loading), the Biotechnology Space Support Center
(BIOTESC; control of payload operations), and the crew of Expedition 57 (Alexander Gerst, Serena
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

Aun˜ o´ n-Chancellor, and Sergey Prokopyev; payload handling). R.L., G.H., and M.D. thank Cousin Tina Lara
for accommodations. We thank Sander van den Heuvel (Utrecht University) for permission to use the
C. elegans microscopy image in the graphical abstract and Beata Edyta Mierzwa (www.BeataScienceArt.
com) for permission to use the Molecular Muscle Experiment mission logo in the Graphical Abstract. We
thank the UK Space Agency, the European Space Agency (ESA), the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
(JAXA), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for their support of the Molecular
Muscle Experiment. This work was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council (BBSRC United Kingdom) (Grant Nos. BB/N015894/1) and the European Space Agency (ESA) (des-
ignations Molecular Muscle Experiment and ESA-14-ISLRA_Prop-0029). S.A.V. acknowledges support from
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) (Grant No. NNX15AL16G).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.A.V., T.E., and N.J.S. collaborated on the Molecular Muscle Experiment team who organized the mission
project. R.L., T.E., N.J.S., and M.D. conceived and designed the experiments. R.L., G.H., A.K.P., C.J.G.,
C.S.D., T.E., and N.J.S. prepared samples for spaceﬂight and ground control experiments. R.L. and G.H.
scored samples and analyzed data. R.L. and M.D. wrote the manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: October 29, 2020
Revised: December 17, 2020
Accepted: January 21, 2021
Published: February 19, 2021
REFERENCES
Adams, G.R., Caiozzo, V.J., and Baldwin, K.M.
(2003). Skeletal muscle unweighting: spaceﬂight
and ground-based models. J. Appl. Physiol. 95,
2185–2201.
Adenle, A.A., Johnsen, B., and Szewczyk, N.J.
(2009). Review of the results from the International
C. elegans ﬁrst experiment (ICE-FIRST). Adv.
Space Res. 44, 210–216.
Albeg, A., Smith, C.J., Chatzigeorgiou, M.,
Feitelson, D.G., Hall, D.H., Schafer, W.R., Miller,
D.M., 3rd, and Treinin, M. (2011). C. elegans
multi-dendritic sensory neurons: morphology and
function. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 46, 308–317.
Arnold, M.L., Cooper, J., Grant, B.D., and Driscoll,
M. (2020). Quantitative approaches for scoring
in vivo neuronal aggregate and organelle
extrusion in large exopher vesicles in C. elegans.
J. Vis. Exp. e61368, https://doi.org/10.3791/
61368 (2020).
Blaber, E.A., Pecaut, M.J., and Jonscher, K.R.
(2017). Spaceﬂight activates autophagy programs
and the proteasome in mouse liver. Int. J. Mol.
Sci. 18, 2062.
Chalﬁe, M., and Sulston, J. (1981). Developmental
genetics of the mechanosensory neurons of
Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Biol. 82, 358–370.
Chalﬁe, M., Tu, Y., Euskirchen, G., Ward, W.W.,
and Prasher, D.C. (1994). Green ﬂuorescent
protein as a marker for gene expression. Science
263, 802–805.
Chatzigeorgiou, M., Yoo, S., Watson, J.D., Lee,
W.H., Spencer, W.C., Kindt, K.S., Hwang, S.W.,
Miller, D.M., 3rd, Treinin, M., Driscoll, M., et al.
(2010). Speciﬁc roles for DEG/ENaC and TRP
channels in touch and thermosensation in C.
elegans nociceptors. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 861–868.
Crucian, B.E., Chouker, A., Simpson, R.J., Mehta,
S., Marshall, G., Smith, S.M., Zwart, S.R., Heer, M.,
Ponomarev, S., Whitmire, A., et al. (2018).
Immune system dysregulation during spaceﬂight:
potential countermeasures for deep space
exploration missions. Front. Immunol. 9, 1437.
Demontis, G.C., Germani, M.M., Caiani, E.G.,
Barravecchia, I., Passino, C., and Angeloni, D.
(2017). Human pathophysiological adaptations to
the space environment. Front. Physiol. 8, 547.
Diaz-Balzac, C.A., Rahman, M., Lazaro-Pena, M.I.,
Martin Hernandez, L.A., Salzberg, Y., Aguirre-
Chen, C., Kaprielian, Z., and Bulow, H.E. (2016).
Muscle- and skin-derived cues jointly orchestrate
patterning of somatosensory dendrites. Curr.
Biol. 26, 2397.
E, L., Zhou, T., Koh, S., Chuang, M., Sharma, R.,
Pujol, N., Chisholm, A.D., Eroglu, C., Matsunami,
H., and Yan, D. (2018). An antimicrobial peptide
and its neuronal receptor regulate dendrite
degeneration in aging and infection. Neuron 97,
125–138 e125.
Edgerton, V.R., Zhou, M.Y., Ohira, Y., Klitgaard,
H., Jiang, B., Bell, G., Harris, B., Saltin, B.,
Gollnick, P.D., Roy, R.R., et al. (1995). Human ﬁber
size and enzymatic properties after 5 and 11 days
of spaceﬂight. J. Appl. Physiol. 78, 1733–1739.
Ferranti, F., Caruso, M., Cammarota, M., Masiello,
M.G., Corano Scheri, K., Fabrizi, C., Fumagalli, L.,
Schiraldi, C., Cucina, A., Catizone, A., et al. (2014).
Cytoskeleton modiﬁcations and autophagy
induction in TCam-2 seminoma cells exposed to
simulated microgravity. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014,
904396.
Fitts, R.H., Riley, D.R., and Widrick, J.J. (2001).
Functional and structural adaptations of skeletal
muscle to microgravity. J. Exp. Biol. 204, 3201–
3208.
Fukazawa, T., Tanimoto, K., Shrestha, L., Imura, T.,
Takahashi, S., Sueda, T., Hirohashi, N., Hiyama,
E., and Yuge, L. (2019). Simulated microgravity
enhances CDDP-induced apoptosis signal via
p53-independent mechanisms in cancer cells.
PLoS One 14, e0219363.
Garrett-Bakelman, F.E., Darshi, M., Green, S.J.,
Gur, R.C., Lin, L., Macias, B.R., McKenna, M.J.,
Meydan, C., Mishra, T., Nasrini, J., et al. (2019).
The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional
analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight.
Science 364, eaau8650.
Gioran, A., Nicotera, P., and Bano, D. (2014).
Impaired mitochondrial respiration promotes
dendritic branching via the AMPK signaling
pathway. Cell Death Dis. 5, e1175.
Hartman, J.H., Smith, L.L., Gordon, K.L.,
Laranjeiro, R., Driscoll, M., Sherwood, D.R., and
Meyer, J.N. (2018). Swimming exercise and
transient food deprivation in Caenorhabditis
elegans promote mitochondrial maintenance
and protect against chemical-induced
mitotoxicity. Sci. Rep. 8, 8359.
Herndon, L.A., Schmeissner, P.J., Dudaronek,
J.M., Brown, P.A., Listner, K.M., Sakano, Y.,
Paupard, M.C., Hall, D.H., and Driscoll, M. (2002).
Stochastic and genetic factors inﬂuence tissue-
speciﬁc decline in ageing C. elegans. Nature 419,
808–814.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
15
iScience
Article

Higashibata, A., Hashizume, T., Nemoto, K.,
Higashitani, N., Etheridge, T., Mori, C., Harada,
S., Sugimoto, T., Szewczyk, N.J., Baba, S.A., et al.
(2016). Microgravity elicits reproducible
alterations in cytoskeletal and metabolic gene
and protein expression in space-ﬂown
Caenorhabditis elegans. NPJ Microgravity 2,
15022.
Higashibata, A., Szewczyk, N.J., Conley, C.A.,
Imamizo-Sato, M., Higashitani, A., and Ishioka, N.
(2006). Decreased expression of myogenic
transcription factors and myosin heavy chains in
Caenorhabditis elegans muscles developed
during spaceﬂight. J. Exp. Biol. 209, 3209–3218.
Honda, Y., Higashibata, A., Matsunaga, Y.,
Yonezawa, Y., Kawano, T., Higashitani, A.,
Kuriyama, K., Shimazu, T., Tanaka, M., Szewczyk,
N.J., et al. (2012). Genes down-regulated in
spaceﬂight are involved in the control of longevity
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Sci. Rep. 2, 487.
Honda, Y., Honda, S., Narici, M., and Szewczyk,
N.J. (2014). Spaceﬂight and ageing: reﬂecting on
Caenorhabditis elegans in space. Gerontology
60, 138–142.
Jeong, A.J., Kim, Y.J., Lim, M.H., Lee, H., Noh, K.,
Kim, B.H., Chung, J.W., Cho, C.H., Kim, S., and
Ye, S.K. (2018). Microgravity induces autophagy
via mitochondrial dysfunction in human
Hodgkin’s lymphoma cells. Sci. Rep. 8, 14646.
Jessen, N.A., Munk, A.S., Lundgaard, I., and
Nedergaard, M. (2015). The glymphatic system: a
beginner’s guide. Neurochem. Res. 40, 2583–
2599.
Kaushik, S., and Cuervo, A.M. (2015). Proteostasis
and aging. Nat. Med. 21, 1406–1415.
Kravtsov, V., Oren-Suissa, M., and Podbilewicz, B.
(2017). The fusogen AFF-1 can rejuvenate the
regenerative potential of adult dendritic trees by
self-fusion. Development 144, 2364–2374.
Laranjeiro, R., Harinath, G., Burke, D., Braeckman,
B.P., and Driscoll, M. (2017). Single swim sessions
in C. elegans induce key features of mammalian
exercise. BMC Biol. 15, 30.
Laranjeiro, R., Harinath, G., Hewitt, J.E., Hartman,
J.H., Royal, M.A., Meyer, J.N., Vanapalli, S.A., and
Driscoll, M. (2019). Swim exercise in
Caenorhabditis elegans extends neuromuscular
and gut healthspan, enhances learning ability,
and protects against neurodegeneration. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 116, 23829–23839.
Lesch, B.J., Gehrke, A.R., Bulyk, M.L., and
Bargmann, C.I. (2009). Transcriptional regulation
and stabilization of left-right neuronal identity in
C. elegans. Genes Dev. 23, 345–358.
Li, Y., Chen, B., Zou, W., Wang, X., Wu, Y., Zhao,
D., Sun, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, L., Miao, L., et al. (2016).
The lysosomal membrane protein SCAV-3
maintains lysosome integrity and adult longevity.
J. Cell Biol. 215, 167–185.
Liang, X., Dong, X., Moerman, D.G., Shen, K., and
Wang, X. (2015). Sarcomeres pattern
proprioceptive sensory dendritic endings
through UNC-52/Perlecan in C. elegans. Dev.
Cell 33, 388–400.
Lim, J., and Yue, Z. (2015). Neuronal aggregates:
formation, clearance, and spreading. Dev. Cell
32, 491–501.
Liu, Y., Zou, W., Yang, P., Wang, L., Ma, Y., Zhang,
H., and Wang, X. (2018). Autophagy-dependent
ribosomal RNA degradation is essential for
maintaining nucleotide homeostasis during C.
elegans development. Elife 7, e36588.
Locatelli, L., Cazzaniga, A., De Palma, C.,
Castiglioni, S., and Maier, J.A.M. (2020).
Mitophagy contributes to endothelial adaptation
to simulated microgravity. FASEB J. 34, 1833–
1845.
Loehr, J.A., Guilliams, M.E., Petersen, N., Hirsch,
N., Kawashima, S., and Ohshima, H. (2015).
Physical training for long-duration spaceﬂight.
Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 86, A14–A23.
Melentijevic, I., Toth, M.L., Arnold, M.L., Guasp,
R.J., Harinath, G., Nguyen, K.C., Taub, D., Parker,
J.A., Neri, C., Gabel, C.V., et al. (2017). C. elegans
neurons jettison protein aggregates and
mitochondria under neurotoxic stress. Nature
542, 367–371.
Oren-Suissa, M., Gattegno, T., Kravtsov, V., and
Podbilewicz, B. (2017). Extrinsic repair of injured
dendrites as a paradigm for regeneration by
fusion in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 206,
215–230.
Oren-Suissa, M., Hall, D.H., Treinin, M., Shemer,
G., and Podbilewicz, B. (2010). The fusogen EFF-1
controls sculpting of mechanosensory dendrites.
Science 328, 1285–1288.
Pollard, A.K., Gaffney, C.J., Deane, C.S., Balsamo,
M., Cooke, M., Ellwood, R.A., Hewitt, J.E.,
Mierzwa, B.E., Mariani, A., Vanapalli, S.A., et al.
(2020). Molecular muscle experiment: hardware
and operational lessons for future astrobiology
space experiments. Astrobiology 20, 935–943.
Ries, M., and Sastre, M. (2016). Mechanisms of
abeta clearance and degradation by glial cells.
Front. Aging Neurosci. 8, 160.
Ryu, H.W., Choi, S.H., Namkoong, S., Jang, I.S.,
Seo, D.H., Choi, I., Kim, H.S., and Park, J. (2014).
Simulated microgravity contributes to autophagy
induction by regulating AMP-activated protein
kinase. DNA Cell Biol. 33, 128–135.
Salzberg, Y., Diaz-Balzac, C.A., Ramirez-Suarez,
N.J., Attreed, M., Tecle, E., Desbois, M.,
Kaprielian, Z., and Bulow, H.E. (2013). Skin-
derived cues control arborization of sensory
dendrites in Caenorhabditis elegans. Cell 155,
308–320.
Sambandam, Y., Townsend, M.T., Pierce, J.J.,
Lipman, C.M., Haque, A., Bateman, T.A., and
Reddy, S.V. (2014). Microgravity control of
autophagy modulates osteoclastogenesis. Bone
61, 125–131.
Santucci, D., Kawano, F., Ohira, T., Terada, M.,
Nakai, N., Francia, N., Alleva, E., Aloe, L., Ochiai,
T., Cancedda, R., et al. (2012). Evaluation of gene,
protein and neurotrophin expression in the brain
of mice exposed to space environment for
91 days. PLoS One 7, e40112.
Selch, F., Higashibata, A., Imamizo-Sato, M.,
Higashitani, A., Ishioka, N., Szewczyk, N.J., and
Conley, C.A. (2008). Genomic response of the
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to
spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Res. 41, 807–815.
Shen, M., and Frishman, W.H. (2019). Effects of
spaceﬂight on cardiovascular physiology and
health. Cardiol. Rev. 27, 122–126.
Sibonga, J.D. (2013). Spaceﬂight-induced bone
loss: is there an osteoporosis risk? Curr.
Osteoporos. Rep. 11, 92–98.
Toth, M.L., Melentijevic, I., Shah, L., Bhatia, A., Lu,
K., Talwar, A., Naji, H., Ibanez-Ventoso, C.,
Ghose, P., Jevince, A., et al. (2012). Neurite
sprouting and synapse deterioration in the aging
Caenorhabditis elegans nervous system.
J. Neurosci. 32, 8778–8790.
Wang, Z., Zhao, H., Yuan, C., Zhao, D., Sun, Y.,
Wang, X., and Zhang, H. (2019). The RBG-1-RBG-
2 complex modulates autophagy activity by
regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function in
C. elegans. J. Cell Sci. 132, jcs234195.
Way, J.C., and Chalﬁe, M. (1989). The mec-3 gene
of Caenorhabditis elegans requires its own
product for maintained expression and is
expressed in three neuronal cell types. Genes
Dev. 3, 1823–1833.
Weber, B., and Barros, L.F. (2015). The astrocyte:
powerhouse and recycling center. Cold Spring
Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7, a020396.
White, J.G., Southgate, E., Thomson, J.N., and
Brenner, S. (1986). The structure of the nervous
system of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 314, 1–340.
Williams, D., Kuipers, A., Mukai, C., and Thirsk, R.
(2009). Acclimation during space ﬂight: effects on
human physiology. CMAJ 180, 1317–1323.
Willis, C.R.G., Szewczyk, N.J., Costes, S.V.,
Udranszky, I.A., Reinsch, S.S., Etheridge, T., and
Conley, C.A. (2020). Comparative transcriptomics
identiﬁes neuronal and metabolic adaptations to
hypergravity and microgravity in Caenorhabditis
elegans. iScience 23, 101734.
Xie, Y., Vessey, J.P., Konecna, A., Dahm, R.,
Macchi, P., and Kiebler, M.A. (2007). The GTP-
binding protein Septin 7 is critical for dendrite
branching and dendritic-spine morphology. Curr.
Biol. 17, 1746–1751.
Yang, W.K., and Chien, C.T. (2019). Beyond being
innervated: the epidermis actively shapes sensory
dendritic patterning. Open Biol. 9, 180257.
Zhu, T., Liang, X., Wang, X.M., and Shen, K. (2017).
Dynein and EFF-1 control dendrite morphology
by regulating the localization pattern of SAX-7 in
epidermal cells. J. Cell Sci. 130, 4063–4071.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
iScience 24, 102105, February 19, 2021
iScience
Article

iScience, Volume 24
Supplemental Information
Spaceﬂight affects neuronal morphology
and alters transcellular degradation
of neuronal debris in adult Caenorhabditis elegans
Ricardo Laranjeiro, Girish Harinath, Amelia K. Pollard, Christopher J. Gaffney, Colleen S.
Deane, Siva A. Vanapalli, Timothy Etheridge, Nathaniel J. Szewczyk, and Monica Driscoll

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S1. Spaceflight modulates the size of high-intensity GFP fluorescent puncta in touch 
receptor neurons. Related to Figure 4. (A) Number of GFP puncta per cell body in each of the six touch 
receptor neurons in ground control and spaceflight Pmec-4GFP animals. We include a confocal image from 
a Pmec-4GFP animal showing GFP puncta in an ALML cell body. Number of touch receptor neurons used 
for analysis: nControl = 54-61, nSpace = 60-64. We determined statistical significance by unpaired two-tailed 
Student’s t test. (B) Proportion of large GFP puncta per cell body in each of the six touch receptor 
neurons in ground control and spaceflight Pmec-4GFP animals. We scored GFP puncta as ‘large’ when 
diameter ≥ 0.9 µm. Number of touch receptor neurons used for analysis: nControl = 54-61, nSpace = 60-64. 
We determined statistical significance by Fisher’s exact test. *P ≤ 0.05. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S2. Spaceflight modulates the number of mCherry foci in touch receptor neurons. Related 
to Figure 5. (A) Number of mCherry foci per cell body in each of the six touch receptor neurons in ground 
control and spaceflight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals. We include a confocal image from a Pmec-4mCherry1 
animal showing mCherry foci in a PLMR cell body. Number of touch receptor neurons used for analysis: 
nControl = 42-61, nSpace = 42-66. We determined statistical significance by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t 
test. (B) Proportion of large mCherry foci per cell body in each of the six touch receptor neurons in ground 
control and spaceflight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals. We scored mCherry foci as ‘large’ when diameter ≥ 0.9 
µm. Number of touch receptor neurons used for analysis: nControl = 42-61, nSpace = 42-66. We determined 
statistical significance by Fisher’s exact test. (C) Number of exophers per each of the six touch receptor 
neurons in ground control and spaceflight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals. We include a confocal image from a 
Pmec-4mCherry1 animal showing an ALML cell body extruding an exopher. *P ≤ 0.05. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S3. Spaceflight leads to accumulation of neuronal-derived mCherry throughout the body of 
middle-aged nematodes. Related to Figure 5. Additional representative confocal images of spaceflight 
Pmec-4mCherry1 animals. Scale bars, 10 µm. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure S4. Accumulation of neuronal-derived mCherry throughout the body of space-flown 
animals appears to be age-dependent. Related to Figure 6. (A, B) Proportion of ground control, 
spaceflight, and young spaceflight Pmec-4mCherry1 animals with/without Starry Night (A) and with/without 
sVesicles (B). Note that we obtained young adults from the same spaceflight bag as the middle-aged 
adults given that some progeny were able to escape FUdR inhibition to develop in the presence of FUdR. 
We easily identified the spaceflight young adults from the middle-aged adults by their reduced size and 
we randomly selected 50 young adults for scoring. Number of animals used for analysis: nControl = 72, 
nSpace = 83, nSpace (young animals) = 50. We determined statistical significance by Fisher’s exact test.          
****P ≤ 0.0001. 
 
 

 
Transparent Methods 
 
C. elegans strains and maintenance 
The C. elegans strains used in this study were: MF190 hmIs4[des-2::GFP + rol-6(su1006)] 
(Oren-Suissa et al., 2010), ZB4510 zdIs5[Pmec-4GFP + lin-15(+)] I, and ZB4065 bzIs166[Pmec-
4mCherry1] (Melentijevic et al., 2017). ZB4510 was generated by outcrossing SK4005 
zdIs5[Pmec-4GFP + lin-15(+)] I (Clark and Chiu, 2003) to N2 five times. Approximately two weeks 
prior to the launch procedure, we transferred animals from NGM agar plates seeded with live 
Escherichia coli OP50-1 to a liquid culture of S-Basal with freeze-dried Escherichia coli OP50 
(LabTIE, 1 vial per 250 mL of S-Basal). After this point, we maintained all C. elegans strains at 
20°C in the liquid culture in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks (Pollard et al., 2020). 
 
Sample preparation for spaceflight 
We synchronized C. elegans populations by bleaching (20% bleach in 2N NaOH) to obtain eggs 
or by gravity settling (Gaffney et al., 2014) to obtain L1 larvae. When the synchronized animals 
reached L4/young adult stage, we moved approximately 300 animals per strain to 6-well tissue 
culture dishes in 1.2 mL of S-Basal with freeze-dried OP50 and 400 µM FUdR. After an 
overnight incubation at 20°C, we added 5.3 mL of S-Basal with freeze-dried OP50 and 400 µM 
FUdR to each well and loaded the entire volume (6.5 mL) into PE flight culture bags (Pollard et 
al., 2020) on December 2, 2018. Culture bags were then placed into experiment cassettes 
(ECs, Kayser Italia) (Pollard et al., 2020) to provide an additional level of containment and to 
protect the C. elegans cultures from launch and/or in-flight damage. Our samples were then 
kept in cold stowage (8-13°C) until they reached the ISS. Launch of SpaceX CRS-16 occurred 
on December 5, 2018 and docking to the ISS occurred on December 8, 2018. On December 9, 
2018, our C. elegans samples were transferred to 20°C for five days on the ISS. After the five 
days, samples were transferred to −80°C and kept frozen until return to Earth.  
For ground control samples, we performed the same synchronization protocol as for spaceflight 
samples and we loaded C. elegans into the PE flight culture bags on December 5, 2018. We 
also placed ground control bags into ECs and exposed them to the same time 
frame/temperatures as spaceflight samples but we maintained cultures always on Earth. 
Temperature conditions experienced by spaceflight samples were recorded by iButton digital 
thermometers (iButtonLink) placed inside ECs and allowed us to expose ground control 

 
samples to similar conditions. We deposited detailed temperature recordings from spaceflight 
and control samples in the Harvard Dataverse repository 
(https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/ATOJCJ).  
 
Confocal microscopy 
We stored the frozen PE flight culture bags at −80°C until we were ready to start the confocal 
imaging. We thawed small fragments of each culture bag in 2% PFA/M9 buffer for 
approximately 30 min at room temperature. Based on previous testing, we determined that 
thawing C. elegans while simultaneously fixing them in PFA was essential to maintain a strong 
fluorescence signal in the reporter strains used in this study. After thaw/fixation, we carefully 
selected, under a stereo microscope, the middle-aged adults present in the sample, which we 
could easily identify from young animals by their large size. We stored animals in M9 buffer at 
4°C until imaging. We performed confocal imaging with an X-Light V2 TP spinning disk unit 
(CrestOptics) mounted to an Axio Observer.Z1 microscope (ZEISS) using MetaMorph Premier 
software (Molecular Devices). We scored all middle-aged adults that we recovered from the 
frozen culture bags, except to score the number of beads/bubbles in PVD dendrites and the 
location of Starry Night and sVesicles in the anterior-posterior body axis and in different tissues, 
for which we randomly selected a subgroup of middle-aged animals. For PVD neurons, we first 
acquired a series of z-stack images from the region anterior to the PVD soma and then obtained 
the maximum intensity projection image using ImageJ, in which we scored PVD dendritic 
morphologies. For touch receptor neurons, we scored phenotypes directly on the confocal 
microscope and we took representative images and z-stack series.      
 
Whole-mount LMP-1 antibody staining 
After thawing/fixing Pmec-4mCherry1 animals in 2% PFA/M9 buffer for 30 min at room 
temperature, we tried different permeabilization methods prior to anti-LMP-1 antibody 
incubation. We permeabilized animals in 1% Triton X-100/M9 buffer for 45 min, in 1% glacial 
acetic acid/ethanol for 30 min, or at −80°C in methanol for 1 hour then in acetone for 30 min 
followed by a serial rehydration at room temperature in 75%, 50%, 25%, and 0% methanol in 
TBS (100mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5) (Djeddi et al., 2015). We washed samples with 
0.1% Tween-20/M9 buffer followed by blocking in 2% BSA/0.1% Tween-20/M9 buffer for 1 hour 
at room temperature. We incubated samples with anti-LMP-1 antibody (1D4B, Developmental 

 
Studies Hybridoma Bank, 1:5 or 1:10 dilution of supernatant) (Hadwiger et al., 2010) in blocking 
solution overnight at 4°C. After several washes with 0.1% Tween-20/M9 buffer, we incubated 
samples with 1:1000 or 1:2000 secondary antibody Goat anti-Mouse, Alexa Fluor 488 
(Invitrogen) in blocking solution at room temperature. After washing thoroughly with 0.1% 
Tween-20/M9 buffer, we imaged samples in the confocal microscope. Despite the different 
permeabilization methods and antibody concentrations tested, we were unable to observe 
specific LMP-1 staining in Pmec-4mCherry1 animals. 
  
Statistical analyses 
The data in this study are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). The 
specific number of data points and the test used for each statistical analysis are presented in 
the figure legends. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Supplemental References 
 
Clark, S.G., and Chiu, C. (2003). C. elegans ZAG-1, a Zn-finger-homeodomain protein, regulates axonal 
development and neuronal differentiation. Development 130, 3781-3794. 
Djeddi, A., Al Rawi, S., Deuve, J.L., Perrois, C., Liu, Y.Y., Russeau, M., Sachse, M., and Galy, V. (2015). 
Sperm-inherited organelle clearance in C. elegans relies on LC3-dependent autophagosome targeting to 
the pericentrosomal area. Development 142, 1705-1716. 
Gaffney, C.J., Bass, J.J., Barratt, T.F., and Szewczyk, N.J. (2014). Methods to assess subcellular 
compartments of muscle in C. elegans. J Vis Exp, e52043. 
Hadwiger, G., Dour, S., Arur, S., Fox, P., and Nonet, M.L. (2010). A monoclonal antibody toolkit for C. 
elegans. PloS one 5, e10161. 
Melentijevic, I., Toth, M.L., Arnold, M.L., Guasp, R.J., Harinath, G., Nguyen, K.C., Taub, D., Parker, J.A., 
Neri, C., Gabel, C.V., et al. (2017). C. elegans neurons jettison protein aggregates and mitochondria 
under neurotoxic stress. Nature 542, 367-371. 
Oren-Suissa, M., Hall, D.H., Treinin, M., Shemer, G., and Podbilewicz, B. (2010). The fusogen EFF-1 
controls sculpting of mechanosensory dendrites. Science 328, 1285-1288. 
Pollard, A.K., Gaffney, C.J., Deane, C.S., Balsamo, M., Cooke, M., Ellwood, R.A., Hewitt, J.E., Mierzwa, 
B.E., Mariani, A., Vanapalli, S.A., et al. (2020). Molecular Muscle Experiment: Hardware and Operational 
Lessons for Future Astrobiology Space Experiments. Astrobiology. 
 
