Spatial regulation of a common precursor from two
distinct genes generates metabolite diversity†
Chun-Jun Guo,a Wei-Wen Sun,a Kenneth S. Bruno,b Berl R. Oakley,c Nancy P. Kellerd
and Clay C. C. Wang*ae
In secondary metabolite biosynthesis, core synthetic genes such as polyketide synthase genes usually
encode proteins that generate various backbone precursors. These precursors are modiﬁed by other
tailoring enzymes to yield a large variety of diﬀerent secondary metabolites. The number of core
synthesis genes in a given species correlates, therefore, with the number of types of secondary
metabolites the organism can produce. In our study, heterologous expression of all the A. terreus NRPS-
like genes showed that two NRPS-like proteins, encoded by atmelA and apvA, release the same natural
product, aspulvinone E. In hyphae this compound is converted to aspulvinones whereas in conidia it is
converted to melanin. The genes are expressed in diﬀerent tissues and this spatial control is probably
regulated by their own speciﬁc promoters. Comparative genomics indicates that atmelA and apvA might
share a same ancestral gene and the gene apvA is located in a highly conserved region in Aspergillus
species that contains genes coding for life-essential proteins. Our data reveal the ﬁrst case in secondary
metabolite biosynthesis in which the tissue speciﬁc production of a single compound directs it into two
separate pathways, producing distinct compounds with diﬀerent functions. Our data also reveal that a
single trans-prenyltransferase, AbpB, prenylates two substrates, aspulvinones and butyrolactones,
revealing that genes outside of contiguous secondary metabolism gene clusters can modify more than
one compound thereby expanding metabolite diversity. Our study raises the possibility of incorporation
of spatial, cell-type speciﬁcity in expression of secondary metabolites of biological interest and provides
new insight into designing and reconstituting their biosynthetic pathways.
Introduction
Filamentous fungi, such as species found within the genus
Aspergillus, are well known producers of secondary metabolites
(SMs)
with
interesting
biological
activities.
The
genome
sequencing of Aspergillus species revealed that the number of
putative SM genes greatly exceeds the number of identied SMs,
suggesting many novel types of SMs still remain to be discov-
ered.1 In general, these SM genes are clustered in the genome.2
A typical cluster contains one key gene required for the
synthesis of the precursor skeleton. These genes usually encode
large multidomain
enzymes belonging
to the polyketide
synthase (PKS) or non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS)
class.3 Other adjacent genes encode enzymes that are involved
in tailoring modications, transport of the product, or co-
regulation of the cluster genes.4 In a given fungal species, the
SM arsenal is usually governed by the number of key synthetic
genes in the genome, and this diversity is multiplied by various
tailoring enzymes that give rise to a considerable number of
diﬀerent natural products.5 For instance, the fungus A. nidulans
has 27 PKS genes, 12 NRPS genes, 14 NRPS-like genes and one
PKS/NRPS hybrid gene.6 In a previous study, Ahuja et al.
systematically characterized the polyketide products of eight
non reducing PKSs (NR-PKSs) in A. nidulans.5 In combination
with the six previously characterized NR-PKS genes, the study
demonstrated that the 14 NR-PKS genes in A. nidulans could be
divided into seven groups based on phylogenetic analysis. More
importantly, each of these NR-PKSs produces a unique product
which can be modied by other tailoring enzymes and incor-
porate into various SM biosynthetic pathways, indicating the
potential of A. nidulans for biosynthesizing a large variety of
diﬀerent PKS-derived SMs.5
Recently, application of an eﬃcient gene targeting system
enabled us to link two NRPS-like genes apvA and btyA to their
corresponding
SMs,
aspulvinones
and
butyrolactones,
aDepartment of Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. E-mail: clayw@usc.edu
bChemical and Biological Process Development Group, Energy and Environment
Directorate, Pacic Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA
cDepartment of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA
dDepartment of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin-
Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
eDepartment of Chemistry, College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA
† Electronic
supplementary
information
(ESI)
available.
See
DOI:
10.1039/c5sc01058f
Cite this: Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913
Received 24th March 2015
Accepted 12th July 2015
DOI: 10.1039/c5sc01058f
www.rsc.org/chemicalscience
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921 | 5913
Chemical
Science
EDGE ARTICLE
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

respectively, in A. terreus strain NIH 2624.7 In this study, we
demonstrated that one NRPS-like gene, atmelA, is involved in
the synthesis of a brown conidial melanin in this fungus.7
Compared to typical NRPSs, NRPS-like genes encode single
module
(A-T-TE)
proteins
missing
the
condensation
(C)
domain.3,8 The adenylation (A) domain is responsible for aryl
acid
substrate
recognition
and
activation.
The
activated
substrate is loaded onto the thiolation (T) domain. The thio-
esterase (TE) domain is suggested to be involved in the
condensation and releasing of the nal product.8 Therefore, the
diversity of NRPS-like products is expanded by a combination of
diﬀerent A domains (substrate selection and activation) and TE
domains (various cyclization and release mechanisms). The
A. terreus genome contains 14 NRPS-like genes with predicted
A-T-TE or similar domain architecture and the SM products for
the majority of these are unknown.
Here we report our eﬀorts to systematically characterize the
products of these 14 NRPS-like genes. We heterologously
expressed each gene in A. nidulans under the control of the
inducible alcA promoter. Surprisingly, our study reveals that two
NRPS-like genes, apvA and atmelA, are responsible for the
formation of the same intermediate, aspulvinone E (1, Fig. 1A).
The aspulvinone E produced by AtmelA is further modied by a
tyrosinase, AtmelB, and is incorporated into the brown melanin
biosynthesis pathway in A. terreus (Fig. 1A). In parallel, the
aspulvinone E synthesized by ApvA is further prenylated by a
trans-prenyltransferase
(AbpB)
to
produce
aspulvinones
(Fig. 1B). AbpB also prenylates butyrolactones, and this reveals
that modifying genes outside of specic clusters can be
responsible for modifying compounds from more than one SM
gene cluster, thus expanding the diversity of SMs produced by
an organism (Fig. 1B).
Our results suggest that the promoter of apvA drives
expression in hyphae resulting in the production of aspulvinone
E (1), which is modied to produce aspulvinone variants. The
atmelA promoter drives expression in conidia, also resulting in
the production of aspulvinone E (1) but in this cell type it is
converted to melanin. Further genetic analysis of apvA and
atmelA indicates that these two genes may share a common
ancestral gene. The gene apvA, which may result from dupli-
cation of the ancestral gene, is inserted in a genomic region
consisting of genes that codes for life-essential proteins. Our
study suggests an unprecedented pathway for conidial pigment
biosynthesis in A. terreus that incorporates an NRPS-like
product aspulvinone E (1) as its substrate (Fig. 1). Our data also
demonstrated how the SM diversity can be expanded by (1)
allocating the same natural product
in diﬀerent fungal
compartments to produce molecules with diﬀerent functions;
(2) encoding tailoring enzyme that is capable of chemically
modifying more than one type of SMs.
Results
Heterologous expression of the NRPS-like genes apvA and
atmelA in A. nidulans both result in aspulvinone E production
Using a recently reported eﬃcient heterologous expression (HE)
system in A. nidulans,9 the individual NRPS-like genes identied
in the A. terreus genome were expressed at either the wA or yA
locus of A. nidulans under regulation of the inducible alcA
promoter (Fig. S1A†). In a previous study, targeted deletion of
apvA depleted production of aspulvinones in A. terreus indi-
cating that this NRPS-like gene is responsible for the biosyn-
thesis of the aspulvinone core.7 As expected, heterologous
expression of apvA results in accumulation of aspulvinone E (1)
Fig. 1
(A) AtmelA and ApvA may synthesize the identical natural product 1 accumulated in diﬀerent fungal tissues. (B) A trans-prenyltransferase,
AbpB, prenylates two substrates, aspulvinones and butyrolactones.
5914 | Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chemical Science
Edge Article
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

which is speculated to be the rst intermediate in the aspulvi-
none pathway (Fig. 1 and 2A and B).7 Unexpectedly, our HE
experiments
revealed
that
AtmelA
produces
the
same
compound (Fig. 2A and B). The gene apvA is responsible for
aspulvinone biosynthesis while atmelA is involved in the
synthesis of the brown conidial pigment.7 The brown conidial
melanin is still produced in the apvA deletant strain as shown in
Fig. 3A. In contrast, deletion of atmelA generates an albino
mutant that is still capable of synthesizing aspulvinones.7
Together, these data reveal that despite having the same activity
(i.e. synthesis of aspulvinone E), ApvA and AtmelA function in
diﬀerent roles in the fungus.
Aspulvinone E occurs as a precursor in both aspulvinone and
melanin pathways
To test our hypothesis that the aspulvinone E is an intermediate
in two diﬀerent pathways, the aspulvinone pathway and
melanin pathway, we wished to delete the rst tailoring gene in
each pathway to accumulate the precursor produced by the gene
responsible for the backbone metabolite. Since we have estab-
lished the genetic linkage between apvA and aspulvinones,7 we
set out to identify the rst tailoring enzyme, which we presumed
was responsible for prenylating 1 to give 2 (Fig. 2A). However, we
could not locate a prenyl transferase (PT) gene proximal to
apvA.7 We then targeted each of the putative PT genes in the
A. terreus genome for deletion (Fig. 4). The individual genes
were knocked out using fragments created by fusion PCR.7 The
SM proles of the correct mutants were examined by LC-MS,
and of the 11 diﬀerent mutants, only the ATEG_01730.1D strain
accumulated aspulvinone E (1) (Fig. 4). Unexpectedly, removal
of ATEG_01730.1 leads to the accumulation of butyrolactone II
(5) as well (Fig. 4). A previous study showed that the NRPS-like
gene btyA is responsible for the biosynthesis of butyrolactone
core.7 The expression of three genes, apvA, btyA, and abpB were
also analyzed using real-time quantitative reverse transcription
PCR (qRT-PCR). (Fig. S2C†) Our data showed that these three
genes are co-expressed under aspulvinone and butyrolactone
producing conditions. These pieces of evidence suggest that
this single PT is responsible for the prenylation of two diﬀerent
metabolites, aspulvinone E (1) and butyrolactone II (5). Thus,
we name the gene a (aspulvinone) b (butyrolactone) p (PT) B.
Denitively establishing the role of AtmelA in the synthesis
of
aspulvinone
E
(1)
required
additional
gene
deletion
experiments. We rst deleted the gene apvA using the direct
repeat (DR) strategy10 followed by the recycling of the AfpyrG
marker (Fig. S1B†). This ensures that aspulvinone E (1) identi-
ed in the later mutants is not from ApvA. However, limited
information is available about the biosynthesis of the brown
conidial melanin in A. terreus. Our study suggests that the
melanin pathway originates from the NRPS-like product
aspulvinone E (1), which is unlike the two main precursors [di-
hydroxyphenylalanin
(DOPA)
and
dihydroxynaphthalene
(DHN)] of currently known melanins.11 The biosynthesis of
DOPA melanin starts with a tyrosine that is oxidized to either
DOPA or dopaquinone (DAQ) by a tyrosinase.11 Considering that
aspulvinone E (1) shares the same phenol moiety as tyrosine, we
speculate that a similar tyrosinase might catalyze the hydrox-
ylation of 1 at the ortho position to give a dihydroxylated
intermediate
that
becomes
incorporated
into
the
brown
melanin (Fig. 1). Following the cluster paradigm, we examined
the
genes
surrounding
atmelA
and
identied
one
gene
ATEG_03564.1 (atmelB) that encodes a putative tyrosinase.
Removal of this gene in the apvAD background changed the
strain's phenotype: the brown melanin was no longer synthe-
sized and the conidia became bright yellow (Fig. 3A). As
expected, the yellow material is aspulvinone E (1), which accu-
mulated in the metabolite proles of the apvA and atmelB
double deletion strain (Fig. 3B). We next deleted the gene atmelA
in the double apvAD, atmelBD strain. The LC-MS prole of this
triple deletion mutant shows the abrogation of the aspulvinone
E (1) which had reappeared in the double mutant (Fig. 3B), in
accord with our HE results that AtmelA was also capable of
producing Aspulvinone E (1).
Aspulvinone E (1) produced by ApvA and AtmelA accumulates
in diﬀerent fungal tissues
Our studies indicate that ApvA and AtmelA synthesize the same
product aspulvinone E (1). We next asked how the fungus is able
to allocate the same chemical synthesized by diﬀerent proteins
into their own specic pathway without cross-interference.
Previous literature reports have shown that the production of
SMs and/or their precursors can be specic to both cellular
organelle and fungal tissue.12,13 We speculated that the aspul-
vinone E (1) from the two genes might be generated in diﬀerent
fungal tissues. Since removal of atmelA or atmelB changes the
phenotype of A. terreus conidia (Fig. 3A), it is likely that
Fig. 2
(A) Compounds related to this study. (B) HPLC proﬁles of extracts of HE strains as detected by total scan UV.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921 | 5915
Edge Article
Chemical Science
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

aspulvinone E (1) from AtmelA might be produced in conidia.
Likewise aspulvinones, derived from 1 that is produced by ApvA,
might be produced inside the hyphae and secreted into the
medium.
To test this hypothesis, we performed tissue-specic extrac-
tion12,13 to reinvestigate the SM proles of the four strains ((1)
wild type; (2) abpBD; (3) apvAD, atmelBD; (4) apvAD, atmelBD,
atmelAD). Fungal cultures were divided into three fractions: (1)
conidial (mostly conidia and minor conidiophore), (2) top layer
agar (mixture of conidiophore, vegetative hyphae, minor inva-
sive hyphae), (3) lower layer agar (mostly invasive hyphae)
(Fig. 3C and D). Compared to the SM proles of total extracts
(Fig. 3B), extraction of the conidia showed the accumulation of
1 only in the apvAD, atmelBD strain (Fig. 3C), not in strains
carrying abpBD or atmelAD. This result indicates that aspulvi-
none E (1) from AtmelA is produced in conidia. Extraction of the
hyphal (mostly invasive) fraction showed the production of 1 in
the abpBD strain and compound 2 in wild type, indicating that
aspulvinone E (1) from ApvA and its derivative 2 are specically
produced in hyphae.
Exchanging atmelA with apvA, under control of the atmelA
promoter, restores melanin production in A. terreus
Next, we asked about the molecular mechanism for regulating
the tissue-specic production of 1. We rst examined the
expression proling of atmelA and apvA in diﬀerent tissues using
Real-Time qRT-PCR (Fig. S2, see ESI† for experimental details).
As expected, the gene atmelA is specically expressed in conidia
compartment (Fig. S2B†) while the gene apvA is locally expressed
in hyphae (Fig. S2C†). We then probed this question by deter-
mining whether ApvA could replace AtmelA in brown melanin
biosynthesis. We assumed that tailoring enzymes like AtmelB
could still recognize aspulvinone E (1) generated from either
ApvA or AtmelA. Another study suggests that the products of two
tubulin genes, benA and tubC, are functionally interchangeable.
The method they used was to disrupt benA and then put tubC
under control of the benA promoter.14,15 Herein we implemented
a similar strategy by replacing the coding region of atmelA with
that of apvA, placing apvA under control of the atmelA promoter
(atmelAp) in the apvAD background (Fig. S1Ci†). As shown in
Fig. 5A, the mutant stain (apvAD, atmelA::apvA) produces
brownish conidia indicating that the brown conidial pigment is
produced in the mutant strain (apvAD, atmelA::apvA). As antici-
pated, the production of aspulvinones (1 or 2) were not detected
(Fig. S3†). The pigment is not produced as much as in the wild
type (Fig. 5A) probably because atmelAp, aer all, is not the
native promoter of ApvA. Quantitative analysis of their expres-
sion using Real-Time qRT-PCR reveals that the expression level
of apvA, which is under the control of atmelA promoter, is lower
than that of atmelA. (Fig. S2B†) This could be one of the reasons
for reduced production of the conidial melanin in the mutant
strain (apvAD, atmelA::apvA). But more importantly, our experi-
ment shows that compound 1 from apvA can be incorporated
into the melanin pathway when apvA is regulated by atmelAp. As
mentioned earlier, the production of 1 from atmelA is conidia-
specic. Thus, this experiment shows that the product of ApvA
can also be produced inside conidia and incorporated into
melanin, suggesting that the tissue specic allocation of their
products may be due to cell-type specic expression of the genes
atmelA and apvA under regulation of their specic promoters.
Fig. 3
(A) Phenotype of A. terreus wild type and other A. terreus
mutant strains growing on LCMM for 5 days. Morphological change of
the fungal conidia can be observed if the deleted genes are involved in
the biosynthesis of the brown conidial pigment. Total extracts (B),
conidial extracts (C) and hyphal extracts (D) of A. terreus wild type and
mutant strains as detected by UV at 370 nm. Aspulvinone related
natural products are labeled in red. In B–D, the black box represents
the top layer agar as described in tissue-speciﬁc extraction. The green
box represents the bottom layer agar in tissue-speciﬁc extraction. The
numbering of the peaks corresponds to the natural products shown in
Fig. 2A. The aspulvinone E (1) and its related natural products can be
detected in LC/MS traces Bi, Bii, Biii, Ciii, Di, Dii, and Diii. Trace amount
of 1 identiﬁed in D iii is due to the diﬀusion of this compound
synthesized in the conidia of the mutant strain. *This metabolite is
related with aspulvinones according to its UV absorption and MS
spectrum.
5916 | Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chemical Science
Edge Article
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

Tissue specic expression of gfp occurs when the coding
sequence of gfp replaces atmelA and apvA
To test our hypothesis, we generated two mutants (atmelAp-gfp,
apvAp-gfp) in which the coding regions of apvA and atmelA were
replaced by the green uorescent protein coding sequence (gfp),
placing
gfp
under
control
of
their
specic
promoters
(Fig. S1Cii†). Both the melanin pathway and aspulvinones
biosynthetic pathways are active when A. terreus is cultivated on
LCMM agar. Under this culture condition, we hypothesized that
atmelAp would turn on the expression of gfp specically inside
the conidia while the gfp regulated by apvAp would display a
green uorescent signal in the hyphae. As expected, we were
able to visualize localization of GFP within the conidia only in
the strain carrying atmelAp-gfp but not in the parental strain
(used as control) or the strain apvAp-gfp. (Fig. 5B) In compar-
ison, hyphal localization of GFP uorescence was observed only
in strain apvAp-gfp. (Fig. 5B) Thus, the tissue specic accumu-
lation of aspulvinone E (1) is probably due to cell-type-specic
expression of the two genes apvA and atmelA.
Discussion
Our study suggests that metabolite diversity can be expanded by
spatial regulation of the same precursor biosynthesized by two
distinct genes. Melanin plays an important role in fungal
pathogenesis as well as in the protection of the producing
organisms from ultraviolet radiation.11,16,17 No denite struc-
tures for melanins have been elucidated due to their large
molecular weight, insolubility in aqueous or organic solvents,
and heterogeneity.11 The characterized conidial melanin of
most Aspergillus species belongs to the dihydroxynaphthalene
(DHN) melanin class.11 Our study reports a unique and
unprecedented pathway of conidial pigment biosynthesis in A.
terreus that originates from the NRPS-like product aspulvinone
E (1) (Fig. 1). We also identied one putative tyrosinase encoded
by the gene atmelB that is involved in a tailoring modication of
aspulvinone E (1) to yield the brown conidial pigment (Fig. 1).
We speculate that the function of the tyrosinase, AtmelB, might
resemble that of its homolog which participates in dihydrox-
yphenylalanine (DOPA)-melanin biosynthesis11 and catalyzes
the ortho hydroxylation of the phenol moiety in the aspulvinone
E (1) core (Fig. 1). It is entirely possible that other genes are
involved in the polymerization of the dual hydroxylated aspul-
vinone E and more eﬀorts will be needed to decipher the
complete biosynthetic pathway of the brown conidial melanin
in A. terreus.
Compounds in the aspulvinone family have been found to
have anti-inuenza A viral (H1N1) activity and are potent
inhibitors of rey luciferase.18,19 The production of aspulvi-
nones, as revealed in a previous study, is a general stress
response of A. terreus.20 The biological functions of aspulvi-
nones, and what role they play in the biology of A. terreus,
remain elusive. AtmelA shares 73% sequence similarity with
ApvA. We noted that there is a 63 bp sequence in atmelA, cor-
responding to the TE domain of AtmelA, that has strong
nucleotide identity with a portion of apvA, indicating that these
two genes may share a common origin (Fig. S5C†). Interestingly,
homology analysis of apvA and its surrounding genes showed
that apvA is inserted into a conserved genome region consisting
of genes that are essential for fungal survival (Fig. S4†). It is
possible that the insertion of apvA is due to the duplication and
translocation of its ancestral homolog. The production of
aspulvinone-type SMs by A. terreus, in response to general
stress, could be related to the chromosomal location of its
producing gene apvA. However, more experiments are denitely
necessary to elucidate the exact role the aspulvinone-type
metabolites play in the growth, survival or metabolic processes
of the fungus A. terreus.
Previous literature suggested that p-hydroxylphenylpyruvate
(HPP), which originates from the shikimate pathway, is the
biosynthetic precursor of aspulvinones.21,22 The shikimate
Fig. 4
HPLC proﬁles of extracts of A. terreus prenyltransferase (PT) genes deletants as detected by UV at 330 nm and 370 nm. The numbering of
the peaks corresponds to the natural products shown in Fig. 2A. Compounds 3 and 4 are prenylated derivatives of compound 5. The “*”
compound is an aspulvinone derivative according to its UV absorption spectrum. ATXXXXX is abbreviated for “ATEG_XXXXX.1”. Deletion of the
gene ATEG_00702.1, a homolog of tdiB involved in the asterriquinone biosynthesis, was not achieved due to the unsuccessful PCR ampliﬁcation
of its ﬂanking region.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921 | 5917
Edge Article
Chemical Science
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

pathway, highly conserved in bacteria, fungi, and plant species,
generates carbon skeletons for the aromatic amino acids
including tryptophan, tyrosine, and phenylalanine.23 HPP is
proposed to be an intermediate in the conversion of prephenate
to L-tyrosine in the shikimate pathway. Limited information has
been reported regarding the tissue localization of HPP in fungi.
Our study suggests that the distribution of HPP is not limited to
certain types of fungal compartments since both the biosyn-
thesis of brown conidial melanin and hyphae specic aspulvi-
nones requires the presence of HPP. Our data indicate that the
tissue-specic expression of apvA and atmelA are due to the
promoters of the two genes. The promoter of apvA drives
expression specically in hyphae while the promoter of atmelA
drives expression in conidia. There are many examples of
hyphal versus spore specic gene regulation. For example, the
expression of the melanin synthesis gene atmelA might regu-
lated by spore specic transcriptional regulators as demon-
strated in a recent study showing that BrlA, the transcription
factor required to initiate conidiophore development in Asper-
gillus spp., is necessary for fumiquinazoline gene expression
and product production.13 The fact that atmelAp is capable of
turning on the expression of both apvA (SM gene) and the gfp
(reporter gene), suggests that it might be a useful tool for
directing the expression of genes specically inside of conidia.
Besides spatial regulation of the intermediate, the SM
diversity can be further expanded, as shown in our study,
through tailoring enzymes that are capable of modifying SMs
with diﬀerent chemical scaﬀolds. Early literature reported the
enzymatic
characterization
of
aspulvinone
dimethylallyl-
transferase in A. terreus. This enzyme is capable of catalyzing
the mono or dual prenylation of aspulvinone E (1).24 The
substrate promiscuity of some PTs has also been tested in vitro
by feeding experiments.25 Our study reveals the in vivo versatility
of AbpB, as it accepts substrates with diﬀerent chemical scaf-
folds. Interestingly, the three genes are dispersed in the A. ter-
reus genome (abpB on chromosome II; apvA on chromosome III;
btyA on chromosome IV), representing another deviation from
the SM gene cluster paradigm. We have discovered in A. nidu-
lans that in some cases, the corresponding PT genes are not
located in the same cluster as the core PKS genes.26,27 Further
comparison of the butyrolactones with aspulvinones shows that
the chemical modications aer prenylation, including epoxi-
dation and dehydrogenation, are very similar (Fig. S6†). Thus,
these two natural product families may share the same set of
tailoring enzymes that specically modies the prenyl groups
attached by AbpB.
Fungi are capable of producing a large variety of SMs with
unique chemical scaﬀolds. It is usually expected that core
synthetic genes, in a given species, are behind the biosynthesis
of diﬀerent core intermediates, as demonstrated in a study
showing that all individual NRPKS in A. nidulans generate a
unique PKS product.5 Phylogenetic analysis, using the protein
sequences of those NRPS-like homologs obtained from the
Broad Institute Aspergillus comparative database, revealed
several other characterized NRPS-like homologs including TdiA
(terrequinone A biosynthesis in A. nidulans),8 RalA (ralfuranone
biosynthesis
in
Ralstonia
solanacearum),28
MicA
(micro-
perfuranone biosynthesis in A. nidulans),29 AtqA (asterriquinone
biosynthesis in A. terreus),7 BtyA (butyrolactone biosynthesis in
A. terreus),7 and EchA (echosides biosynthesis in Streptomyces
Fig. 5
(A) Phenotype of the A. terreus mutant strain apvAD, atme-
lA::apvA (the A. terreus wild type is used as positive control that
produces melanin, the atmelAD strain is used as negative control). (B)
Replacing atmelA and apvA with gfp. Top column: conidia. Bottom
column: hyphae. Top row: GFP. Middle row: diﬀerential interference
contrast (DIC). Bottom row: merged GFP.
5918 | Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chemical Science
Edge Article
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

sp. LZ35)30 (Fig. S5†). These NRPS-like enzymes, with A-T-TE
domain architecture, fall within Clade I of the phylogenetic tree
(Fig. S5†). They are capable of synthesizing natural products
with various chemical scaﬀolds using similar substrates like
phenylpyruvic acid. Previous literature suggested that these
pyruvic acid substrates could be produced via the shikimate
pathway.21,31,32 The TE domains are proposed to catalyze various
condensation, cyclization and releasing reactions to yield
diﬀerent chemical backbones.8 In comparison, another char-
acterized NRPS-like protein (encoded by ATEG_03630.1), with
A-T-R domain arrangement, belongs to Clade V (Fig. S5†).33 In
this case, the aryl acid substrate, generated by an adjacent PKS
(encoded by ATEG_03629.1), is loaded onto the A domain and is
reduced to its aryl-aldehyde precursor by the R domain. Thus,
SM diversity is enriched from these disparate starting points. It
is also common to identify two highly homologous core
synthetic genes, in diﬀerent species, that produces the same
precursor. For example, in the biosynthesis of the mer-
oterpenoids austinol (A. nidulans) and terretonin (A. terreus), the
two PKS genes ausA and trt4 synthesize the same intermediate 3,
5-dimethylorsellinic acid.34
Conclusion
Our work indicates that chemical diversity in SM biosynthesis can
be expanded via multiple dimensions. Prior to our work, the
richness of the fungal SM pool was presumed to be determined by
the number of SM gene clusters while the clustered genes are
associated with the biosynthesis of a distinct type of SM, with
some exceptions.12,13,35 In our study, we have shown that A. terreus
deploys an additional strategy to enrich its natural product pool.
Although the same precursor aspulvinone E (1) is shared in two
pathways (the aspulvinone pathway, a typical SM pathway and the
melanin pathway, producing a self-protection pigment that might
also be involved in the pathogenicity of this fungus), the tissue
specic expression of their biosynthetic genes results in the
production of the same compound in diﬀerent fungal tissues and
allows it to be modied into two diﬀerent products that, we
assume, confer selective advantages in the specic tissues in
which they are produced. The localization of production is
possibly regulated by their specic promoters, but it is entirely
possible that a more complex regulatory mechanism underlies
this phenomenon. This expands our insight into spatial regula-
tion of SMs in fungi.36 More investigation into these promoters
might provide a means to the cell-type-directed biosynthesis of
SMs or manipulating the location of the expression of some genes
responsible for products with interesting biological activities.
Finally, our data demonstrate that AbpB prenylates compounds
in two pathways revealing that two pathways may share the same
tailoring genes. It will be of interest to determine if this charac-
teristic is common to, and specic to, prenyl transferases.
Materials and methods
Strains and molecular manipulations
Primers used in this study are listed in Table S1.† The fungal
strains used in this study are listed in Table S2.† The scheme for
heterologously expressing the NRPS-like genes of A. terreus in
A. nidulans is shown in Fig. S1.† The direct repeat (DR) deletion
and AfpyG marker recycling experimental design is shown in
Fig. S1.† The construction of fusion PCR products, protoplast
generation, and transformation were carried out as previously
described.7,9 The scheme of diagnostic PCR is shown in Fig. S8.†
For real time qRT-PCR, the A. terreus wild type strain and the
mutant strain (apvAD, atmelA::apvA) were cultivated on LCMM
agar for mRNA extraction from conidia. The A. terreus wild type
strain was cultivated in LCMM liquid broth for mRNA extraction
from hyphae. Total mRNA was extracted by using the Qiagen
RNeasy Plant Mini Kit. The cDNA was made from the equal
amount of mRNA. The expression of every gene was analyzed
with the ABI 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system (see ESI for
experimental details†).
Fermentation and LC-MS analysis
(1) A. nidulans strain LO4389 and other HE mutant strains were
cultivated at 37 C in 50 ml LMM liquid medium (6 g l1 NaNO3,
0.52 g l1 KCl, 0.52 g l1 MgSO4$7H2O, 1.52 g l1 KH2PO4, 20 g
l1 lactose supplemented with 1 ml l1 of trace element solu-
tion) at 1  106 spore per ml per 125 ml ask with shaking at
180 rpm. The nutrients uridine, uracil, pyridoxine and ribo-
avin were supplemented if necessary. As previously reported,9
44 ml (10 mM) cyclopentanone was added into the medium aer
18 h of incubation. The incubator temperature was then
changed to 30 C and the culture medium was collected 72 h
aer cyclopentanone induction. The medium was ltrated and
extracted twice with ethyl acetate (EtOAc, 50 ml). Preparation of
the HPLC-MS samples and the condition for MS analysis were as
previously described.7
(2) For the prenyltransferase screening experiment, A. terreus
NIH 2624 and the mutant strains were point inoculated at 30 C
on LCMM agar plates (6 g l1 NaNO3, 0.52 g l1 KCl, 0.52 g l1
MgSO4$7H2O, 1.52 g l1 KH2PO4, 10 g l1 D-glucose, 20 g l1
lactose, 15 g l1 agar supplemented with 1 ml l1 of trace
element solution) per plate (D ¼ 10 cm). Aer 5 days, agar was
chopped into small pieces and extracted with 50 ml MeOH
followed by 60 ml 1 : 1 CH2Cl2/MeOH. The extract was evapo-
rated in vacuo to yield a water residue, which was suspended in
25 ml H2O and partitioned with 25 ml EtOAc, twice. Preparation
of the HPLC-MS samples and the condition for MS analysis were
the same as previously described.7
(3) For the extraction of diﬀerent fungal tissues for aspulvi-
none production, the procedure was similar to a previously
reported procedure.12,13 Plates containing 20 ml LCMM agar
(1.5% agar) were overlaid with another 10 ml of LCMM agar
(0.75% agar). Plates were point inoculated with wild type or the
DR mutant strains and grown at 30 C for 4 days. Conidia were
harvested by adding 7 ml salt solution (8.5 g l1 NaCl) followed
by gently scraping with a sterile spreader. The conidial solution
was inspected under the microscope to be largely free of hyphae
and conidiophores. The conidial fraction was sonicated for 1 h
and extracted twice with an equal volume of EtOAc. The top
layer was then washed with 10 ml sterile water twice and
removed with a sterile spatula. The bottom agar layer was then
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921 | 5919
Edge Article
Chemical Science
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

chopped
into
small
pieces
and
extracted
as
previously
described. Preparation of the HPLC-MS samples from diﬀerent
tissues and the conditions for MS analysis were as previously
described.7
Isolation of secondary metabolites
For scale up, A. nidulans HE strains were cultivated at 37 C in 1
liter LMM liquid medium (100 ml per ask) at 1  106 spores
per ml with shaking at 180 rpm. The nutrients uridine, uracil,
pyridoxine and riboavin were supplemented if necessary. To
induce expression, 88 ml cyclopentanone was added into the
medium aer 18 h of incubation. The incubator temperature
was then changed to 30
C and the culture medium was
collected 72 h aer cyclopentanone induction. The medium
was ltrated and extracted three times with equal volume of
EtOAc. The combined EtOAc layers were evaporated to a crude
extract.
Further
purication
of
fractions
with
targeted
compounds was carried out by gradient HPLC on a C18 reverse
phase column [Phenomenex Luna 5 mm C18, 250  10 mm]
with a ow rate of 5.0 ml min1 and measured by a UV detector
at 254 nm.
Fluorescence microscopy
The wild type and two mutant strains (atmelAp-gfp, apvAp-gfp)
were cultivated on the two-layer agar plates as mentioned. Plates
were point inoculated with wild type or the mutant strains and
grown at 30 C for 5 days. The conidia were collected as previ-
ously described and the conidial solution was diluted 10 times
with sterile water. A 10 ml portion of the diluted solution was
placed on a pre-cleaned microscope slide and covered with a
coverslip. For imaging of the hyphal GFP uorescence signal,
the top layer was removed as previously described. A small
portion of hyphae containing agar (<10 ml) was placed on a pre-
cleaned microscope slide and covered with a coverslip. All the
samples were examined under an optical microscope to conrm
that the conidia and hyphae could be clearly visualized. Images
were taken with a Zeiss LSM 510 Meta NLO (Thornwood, NY)
confocal imaging system equipped with Argon, red HeNe, and
green HeNe lasers and a Coherent Chameleon Ti–Sapphire laser
mounted on a vibration-free table.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr James F. Sanchez, Dr Yi-Ming Chiang, and Dr Shu-
Lin Chang for their insightful discussion. Chun-Jun Guo was
supported by the National Science Foundation – Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation-MIKS (Grant 1136903).
Research conducted in the lab of Clay C. C. Wang is supported
by
the
National
Institute
of
General
Medical
Sciences
GM084077, the National Science Foundation – Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation-MIKS (Grant 1136903),
the Department of Energy, Bioenergy Technologies oﬃce, the
Department of Defense Strategic Environmental Research and
Development program (SERDP), and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration Space Biology program.
References
1 N. Khaldi, F. T. Seifuddin, G. Turner, D. Ha, W. C. Nierman,
K. H. Wolfe and N. D. Fedorova, Fungal Genet. Biol., 2010, 47,
736.
2 N. P. Keller, G. Turner and J. W. Bennett, Nat. Rev. Microbiol.,
2005, 3, 937.
3 M. A. Fischbach and C. T. Walsh, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106,
3468.
4 D. W. Brown, J. H. Yu, H. S. Kelkar, M. Fernandes,
T. C. Nesbitt, N. P. Keller, T. H. Adams and T. J. Leonard,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 1418.
5 M. Ahuja, Y.-M. Chiang, S.-L. Chang, M. B. Praseuth,
R.
Entwistle,
J.
F.
Sanchez,
H.-C.
Lo,
H.-H.
Yeh,
B. R. Oakley and C. C. C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012,
134, 8212.
6 H. von D¨ohren, Fungal Genet. Biol., 2009, 46, S45.
7 C. J. Guo, B. P. Knox, J. F. Sanchez, Y. M. Chiang, K. S. Bruno
and C. C. Wang, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 3562.
8 C. J. Balibar, A. R. Howard-Jones and C. T. Walsh, Nat. Chem.
Biol., 2007, 3, 584.
9 Y. M. Chiang, C. E. Oakley, M. Ahuja, R. Entwistle, A. Schultz,
S. L. Chang, C. T. Sung, C. C. Wang and B. R. Oakley, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7720.
10 J. B. Nielsen, M. L. Nielsen and U. H. Mortensen, Fungal
Genet. Biol., 2008, 45, 165.
11 K.
Langfelder,
M.
Streibel,
B.
Jahn,
G.
Haase
and
A. A. Brakhage, Fungal Genet. Biol., 2003, 38, 143.
12 E. Berthier, F. Y. Lim, Q. Deng, C. J. Guo, D. P. Kontoyiannis,
C. C. Wang, J. Rindy, D. J. Beebe, A. Huttenlocher and
N. P. Keller, PLoS Pathog., 2013, 9, e1003289.
13 F. Y. Lim, B. Ames, C. T. Walsh and N. P. Keller, Cell.
Microbiol., 2014, 16, 1267.
14 G. S. May, J. Cell Biol., 1989, 109, 2267.
15 B. R. Oakley, Fungal Genet. Biol., 2004, 41, 420.
16 H.
C.
Eisenman
and
A.
Casadevall,
Appl.
Microbiol.
Biotechnol., 2012, 93, 931.
17 Q. Gao and F. Garcia-Pichel, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2011, 9,
791.
18 H. Gao, W. Guo, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Zhu, T. Zhu, Q. Gu,
W. Wang and D. Li, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2013, 23, 1776.
19 P. G. Cruz, D. S. Auld, P. J. Schultz, S. Lovell, K. P. Battaile,
R. MacArthur, M. Shen, G. Tamayo-Castillo, J. Inglese and
D. H. Sherman, Chem. Biol., 2011, 18, 1442.
20 A. Hanlon and S. O'Connor, 2006, http://hdl.handle.net/
1721.1/37692.
21 K. Nitta, N. Fujita, T. Yoshimura, K. Arai and Y. Yamamoto,
Chem. Pharm. Bull., 1983, 31, 1528.
22 P. M. Dewick, Nat. Prod. Rep., 1984, 1, 451.
23 T. Tohge, M. Watanabe, R. Hoefgen and A. R. Fernie, Front.
Plant Sci., 2013, 4, 62.
24 I. Takahashi, N. Ojima, K. Ogura and S. Seto, Biochemistry,
1978, 17, 2696.
25 X. Yu, X. Xie and S. M. Li, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011,
92, 737.
5920 | Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chemical Science
Edge Article
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

26 J. F. Sanchez, R. Entwistle, J.-H. Hung, J. Yaegashi, S. Jain,
Y.-M. Chiang, C. C. C. Wang and B. R. Oakley, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2011, 133, 4010.
27 H.-C. Lo, R. Entwistle, C.-J. Guo, M. Ahuja, E. Szewczyk,
J.-H. Hung, Y.-M. Chiang, B. R. Oakley and C. C. C. Wang,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4709.
28 B. Wackler, P. Schneider, J. M. Jacobs, J. Pauly, C. Allen,
M. Nett and D. Hoﬀmeister, Chem. Biol., 2011, 18, 354.
29 H.-H. Yeh, Y.-M. Chiang, R. Entwistle, M. Ahuja, K.-H. Lee,
K. Bruno, T.-K. Wu, B. Oakley and C. C. Wang, Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 96, 739.
30 J. Zhu, W. Chen, Y.-Y. Li, J.-J. Deng, D.-Y. Zhu, J. Duan, Y. Liu,
G.-Y. Shi, C. Xie, H.-X. Wang and Y.-M. Shen, Gene, 2014, 546,
352.
31 A. R. Knaggs, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2003, 20, 119.
32 K. Arai and Y. Yamamoto, Chem. Pharm. Bull., 1990, 38, 2929.
33 M. Wang, M. Beissner and H. Zhao, Chem. Biol., 2014, 21,
257.
34 C.-J. Guo, B. P. Knox, Y.-M. Chiang, H.-C. Lo, J. F. Sanchez,
K.-H. Lee, B. R. Oakley, K. S. Bruno and C. C. C. Wang,
Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 5684.
35 P. Wiemann, C. J. Guo, J. M. Palmer, R. Sekonyela,
C. C. Wang and N. P. Keller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.,
2013, 110, 17065.
36 F. Y. Lim and N. P. Keller, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2014, 31, 1277.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5913–5921 | 5921
Edge Article
Chemical Science
Open Access Article. Published on 13 July 2015. Downloaded on 24/07/2017 09:39:53. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
