Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Spatiotemporal expression and control of
haemoglobin in space
Josef Borg1,12, Conor Loy2,12, JangKeun Kim
2,12, Alfred Buhagiar1,
Christopher Chin
2, Namita Damle2, Iwijn De Vlaminck2, Alex Felice3,
Tammy Liu
4, Irina Matei
2, Cem Meydan
2, Masafumi Muratani
5,
Omary Mzava6, Eliah Overbey
2, Krista A. Ryon2, Scott M. Smith
7,
Braden T. Tierney
2, Guy Trudel
4, Sara R. Zwart
7,8, Afshin Beheshti
9,10
,
Christopher E. Mason
2,11
& Joseph Borg
1
It is now widely recognised that the environment in space activates a diverse
set of genes involved in regulating fundamental cellular pathways. This
includes the activation of genes associated with blood homeostasis and
erythropoiesis, with a particular emphasis on those involved in globin chain
production. Haemoglobin biology provides an intriguing model for studying
space omics, as it has been extensively explored at multiple -omic levels,
spanning DNA, RNA, and protein analyses, in both experimental and clinical
contexts. In this study, we examined the developmental expression of hae-
moglobin over time and space using a unique suite of multi-omic datasets
available on NASA GeneLab, from the NASA Twins Study, the JAXA CFE study,
and the Inspiration4 mission. Our ﬁndings reveal signiﬁcant variations in glo-
bin gene expression corresponding to the distinct spatiotemporal character-
istics of the collected samples. This study sheds light on the dynamic nature of
globin gene regulation in response to the space environment and provides
valuable insights into the broader implications of space omics research.
An interesting phenomenon that has been observed in studies related
to space medicine and biology is the clinical phenotype associated
with space anaemia. In the environment on board the International
Space Station, astronauts experience a reduction in their red blood cell
mass, associated with anaemia, which is however resolved after a few
months back on Earth1,2. The mechanism behind the incidence of space
anaemia is still unknown, much like another important occurrence that
deals with haemoglobin gene switching3. The globin gene switch has
long been thought to act as a paradigm for studying gene switch
mechanisms for both in vitro and in vivo clinical models. Perturbations
in the globin switch may lead to important clinical disorders, also
known as haemoglobinopathies, that include, amongst others, sickle
cell disease and beta-thalassaemia4. The regulation and control of the
globin genes are governed by a set of transcription factors and other
key molecules that, when brought together in close proximity, will
dynamically shift the beta-globin locus and express the globin genes in
a developmental pattern. The ﬁne and exquisite nature of the globin
gene control, as well as their extensive studies to date on all -omic
Received: 19 June 2023
Accepted: 31 May 2024
Check for updates
1Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Malta, Msida MSD2080, Malta. 2Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY,
USA. 3Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida MSD2080, Malta. 4Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Department
of Medicine, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 5Department of Genome Biology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. 6Meinig School of
Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 7Biomedical Research and Environmental Sciences Division, Human Health and Performance
Directorate, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA. 8University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. 9Blue Marble Space Institute of
Science, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 10Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 11The WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA. 12These authors
contributed equally: Josef Borg, Conor Loy, JangKeun Kim.
e-mail: afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov; chm2042@med.cornell.edu; joseph.j.borg@um.edu.mt
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

fronts, have made them the model of choice to study in one of the
harshest environments that humans can experience.
Erythropoiesis is a dynamic multi-step process5 involving the dif-
ferentiation of early erythroid progenitors to enucleated red blood
cells. Under normal circumstances, a large number of transcription
factors such as GATA-1, GATA-2, LMO2, FOG, C-MYB, TAL-1, BCL11A,
RUNX-1 and PU.1 and KLF1 are involved in the formation of haemato-
poietic cell lineages that are in turn ﬁnely controlled and regulated in
producing a subset of cells capable of carrying vast quantities of the
haemoglobin protein for oxygen transport to all tissues6,7.
In this study, we used multiple omic datasets retrieved from
several different human astronaut missions using the powerful plat-
form made available by NASA’s GeneLab8. This platform is now an
established space omics database that provides a wealth of informa-
tion linking molecular biology and genetics with space medical sci-
ences. In particular, the full astronaut blood, as well as transcriptional
data from the NASA Twins Study9,10 was analysed for the globin gene
expression proﬁle as well as the extensive list of transcription factors
and miRNAs involved in the globin gene switch mechanism.
Our research uncovered two important conclusions. Firstly,
exposing humans to orbiter effects resulted in a signiﬁcantly down-
regulated expression of all globin genes, seemingly conﬁrming space
anaemia as documented earlier1. The levels of expression were then
returned back to normal post-ﬂight. Key genes that play important
roles in erythropoiesis were also highly perturbed during spaceﬂight,
with some undergoing up-regulation and others down-regulated,
indicating that space anaemia might occur as a combination of direct
haemolysis coupled with reduced overall production of new, mature
erythroid cells.
Secondly, it was noted that an adult-to-fetal globin switch, similar
to that observed in the amelioration of haemoglobinopathies on Earth,
can be observed through the up-regulation and down-regulation of a
number of genes, encoding for different globins, transcription factors
and other key molecules that play a known role in globin switching
mechanisms. This leads to the possible conclusion that the micro-
gravity environment might elicit the mechanisms behind the devel-
opmental globin gene switch model and sheds an even more in-depth
look at the key players involved in this intricate switch. These may
constitute an important observation for those next frontier missions
that look beyond the moon and further into deep space.
Results
Obtained globin gene, transcription factor (TF) and globin miRNA
expression results are hereunder showcased for the NASA Twins study,
the JAXA study as well as the Inspiration4 mission. A summary of
observed trends is provided in Fig. 1.
Notably, repressors for fetal haemoglobin (HBF) in the hae-
moglobin gene switch showed in-ﬂight down-regulation in almost all
cases for both the NASA twins study and the JAXA astronaut cohort,
suggesting an in-ﬂight shift to favour the production of HBF. Ery-
thropoiesis promoters showed a mixed in-ﬂight and post-ﬂight
expression regulation, with some promoters down-regulated in ﬂight
and thus likely contributing to the space anaemia phenotype while
other promoters were up-regulated in ﬂight, possibly in response to
space anaemia. Erythropoiesis repressors were down-regulated in
ﬂight, possibly as a response to the space anaemia condition as well.
For the NASA Twins study, which constitutes a one-year mission
on the ISS, globin gene and TF expression information is shown
as comparisons carried out between the ground and ﬂight twin (pre-
ﬂight), as well as comparisons made for the ﬂight twin at different
stages in the mission (i.e. pre-ﬂight, during ﬂight and post-ﬂight).
Different cellular fractions are separately considered, with the LD and
the CPT (mononuclear cells separated by centrifugation) cell types
representing the erythroid-containing cellular fractions. Due to the
large number of genes and TFs considered, only those showcasing a
signiﬁcant down-regulation or up-regulation (p-value < 0.1) in at least
one comparison instance are included in Fig. 2. Separately indicated
are genes and TFs in cellular fractions that showed a higher level of
differentially expressed signiﬁcance, with a p-value < 0.05.
Despite the primary focus being on haemoglobin control, regula-
tion, and expression in the context of space-related anaemia, preserving
and presenting data on white blood cells (WBCs) is pivotal for a com-
prehensive understanding of physiological changes in astronauts. WBC
parameters offer valuable insights into the broader immune response,
potential inﬂammation, and overall haematological health during space
missions. Considering the interconnecting nature of erythroid and
immune systems, the analysis and data of WBCs can provide crucial
context to haemoglobin dynamics, ensuring a holistic interpretation of
the physiological adaptations astronauts undergo in the space envir-
onment. This integrative approach enhances the scientiﬁc signiﬁcance
of our study and contributes to a more thorough comprehension of the
impact of space travel on multiple facets of human physiology. Thus,
while the erythroid-containing cellular fractions are perhaps most
directly pertinent, the WBC fractions are still of relevance to this study.
For the JAXA cohort, which constitutes of data from 6 astronauts
who spent a 6-month period on the ISS, normalised expression values
are provided for all globin genes and TFs, including timestamps for
temporal resolution of speciﬁc expression readings collected in-ﬂight
and post-ﬂight. In Fig. 3, up-regulation or down-regulation of expres-
sion for speciﬁc genes or TFs of interest can be deduced when com-
pared to the normalised pre-ﬂight values, also provided. Values
showcased in these diagrams represent mean expression levels mea-
sured across the JAXA cohort, with expression values obtained from
cell-free RNA-Seq samples.
Following differential expression analysis using DESEQ2, volcano
plots of p-values against log2 fold-changes were computed for the
JAXA study, comparing pre-ﬂight, ﬂight and post-ﬂight expression
readings as shown in Fig. 4. Genes are known to be involved in ery-
thropoiesis and the globin gene switch mechanism, were labelled
accordingly if found to be signiﬁcantly up-regulated or down-
regulated. Obtained differential expression values show that ery-
thropoietin (EPO) was indeed signiﬁcantly down-regulated in-ﬂight,
when compared to pre-ﬂight levels, but was then up-regulated again
post-ﬂight, when compared to in-ﬂight levels.
Globin genes such as HBA1, HBB and HBD are also shown to be
signiﬁcantly up-regulated post-ﬂight, when compared to in-ﬂight
levels, with levels of post-ﬂight HBA1 being also signiﬁcantly up-
regulated when compared to pre-ﬂight levels. The same observation
was made for ALAS2, which seems to have been signiﬁcantly up-
regulated post-ﬂight when compared to both pre-ﬂight and in-ﬂight
expression levels. Conversely, HBE1 was signiﬁcantly up-regulated in-
ﬂight, when compared to pre-ﬂight levels. Notably, KLF1 was found to
be signiﬁcantly up-regulated post-ﬂight, when compared to in-ﬂight
expression levels, which is of notable signiﬁcance for the globin gene
switch mechanism, as further discussed in discussion section.
Principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out accordingly for
the JAXA astronauts. Speciﬁcally, PCA was performed across different
features (normalised gene expressions), grouping astronaut sample data
into before, during and after ﬂight groups. The features considered are
genes of interest, that is genes known to be involved in erythropoiesis,
haematopoiesis and the globin gene switch. However, since cell-free
RNA data was used for the JAXA cohort study, trans-acting factors and
globin gene expressions are separately considered features of interest.
Indeed, it is expected that looking at trans-acting factors would show-
case a better representation of true variation between samples since
globin gene expression would be expected to be representative when
considering cellular expression (particularly in the red blood cell com-
ponent, where globin gene expression is most important).
There is an observable separation between the three groups when
considering trans-acting factors, with considerable variance observed
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
2

Fig. 1 | Summary of observed differential expression in genes implicated in the
globin gene switch mechanism and erythropoiesis. A summary ﬁgure show-
casing observed expression in a number of genes and transcription factors of
interest, with observed trends across all three different astronaut cohorts for
samples obtained before ﬂight (BF), in ﬂight (IF) and after ﬂight (AF). A number of
genes relevant to the globin switch mechanism are shown on the left, while a
number of selected genes of relevance to erythropoiesis are shown on the right.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
3

across multiple principal components in this regard. This is particu-
larly evident when looking at PC1 and PC2, which collectively account
for approximately 68.3% of the variance measured across the data.
There is also segregation of samples by ﬂight status when looking at
globin genes, particularly along the ﬁrst principal component, which
accounts for almost 99% of all variance measured in the globin gene
data. These plots are provided in Fig. 5.
A diagram of normalised expression levels is provided for the
Inspiration4 crew in Fig. 6. For this particular case, expression values
are only available pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight, with no in-ﬂight measure-
ment data available. The cellular type here assessed constitutes the
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) cellular fraction. As with
the JAXA cohort data, up-regulation and down-regulation post-ﬂight
can be inferred from direct comparisons with normalised expression
levels pre-ﬂight. Post-ﬂight readings are temporally resolved.
A heat-map of z-scores for normalised cell-free RNA abundance in
pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight samples for the Inspiration4 crew is shown in
Fig. 7, with alpha globin genes, beta-globin genes and trans-acting
factors separately shown. Since this analysis was carried out using data
from cell-free plasma samples, trans-acting factors are also to be
considered as more representative of spatiotemporal effects. Indeed,
the heat-map showcases an observable difference in expression
between pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight time points, with overall up-
regulation in most trans-acting factors.
In addition, a PCA investigation on results obtained from cell-
free RNA samples for the Inspiration4 crew was carried out, with
some separation in samples visible by ﬂight status as observed
in Fig. 8 when taking into account genes of interest (globin genes
and trans-acting factors). This indicates that, as expected, there is
an
observed
difference
in
expression
when
comparing
pre-
ﬂight against post-ﬂight samples using only genes of interest,
indicating that there is a signiﬁcant effect on the expression of
globin genes and trans-acting factors involved in erythropoiesis,
haematopoiesis and the globin gene switch mechanism. Speciﬁc
examples concerning the observed shift are provided in the discus-
sion section.
Globin miRNA expression data was also collected for the NASA
Twins study. As with the globin gene and TF expression, several cellular
fractions were separately investigated and cross-compared between
the ground twin and the ﬂight twin at different mission stages. These
are showcased in Fig. 9, but the ground twin data, in this case, was only
included for reference, with globin miRNA expression varying notably
Fig. 2 | Diagram showcasing comparisons in expression, for a number of dif-
ferent cellular fractions, in the NASA Twins study. Comparisons were made both
between the ground and ﬂight twin as well as comparisons made on a spatio-
temporal basis for the ﬂight twin at different mission stages. Only genes showcasing
at least one expression comparison with signiﬁcant variation (p-value < 0.1) are
included in the diagram, to maintain diagram clarity. Genes with p-values < 0.05 are
separately indicated. All log2 fold-changes and p-values were calculated using
DESeq2 software. Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Fig. 3 | Normalised expression values for known globin genes and other trans-
acting factors for the JAXA astronaut cohort. Genes and trans-acting factors
considered were those known to be involved in the globin gene switch mechanism
and/or erythropoiesis, and expression values were obtained before, during and
after spaceﬂight, at speciﬁc intervals, for the JAXA astronaut cohort, which was
composed of six JAXA astronauts. Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the
Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
4

between the ground twin and the ﬂight twin even before the ﬂight,
meaning that individual-speciﬁc variations were not negligible.
Physiological data collected from several different astronauts
across different missions is also provided in Fig. 10). An indication of
the number of astronauts that contributed to the mean data points
obtained is also included.
Although not included in Fig. 10), reference can also be made to
other physiological parameters that have been measured in other
studies and that are of relevance to considerations made in this study.
Speciﬁcally, levels of reticulocytes and erythropoietin have been
measured as shown in11, amongst others. In particular, measured red
blood cell counts showcase the advent of space anaemia, with post-
ﬂight levels measured immediately upon return (and even 30 days
after return) being lower than pre-ﬂight levels (with some recovery
apparent after 30 days). In congruence with this observation, a very
similar trend in levels of measured haemoglobin is also showcased.
In summary, for the JAXA astronauts, normalised mean values of
expression from cell-free RNA samples for 6 different astronauts were
obtained for different genes, speciﬁcally looking at gene clusters
pertaining to loci of interest in the context of haemoglobin switching,
as shown in Fig. 6. Volcano plots indicated particular, signiﬁcantly
differentially expressed genes of interest for the JAXA cohort (Fig. 4),
with PCA analysis showcasing that separation by ﬂight status is
noticeable when looking at speciﬁc genes and trans-acting factors
of interest in erythropoiesis, haematopoeisis and the globin gene
switching mechanism (Fig. 5).
Fig. 4 | Volcano plots showing signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes for
the JAXA astronaut cohort. Per-gene log2 fold-changes and respective p-values
for comparisons between A ﬂight vs. post-ﬂight, B pre-ﬂight vs. ﬂight and C pre-
ﬂight vs. post-ﬂight for the JAXA astronaut cohort are shown. Volcano plots
showcase signiﬁcantly up-regulated and down-regulated genes in red and green
respectively, with genes of interest falling within the signiﬁcantly differentially
expressed gene sets indicated in the ﬁgure by gene symbol. All log2 fold-changes
and p-values were calculated using DESeq2 software. Source data for the ﬁgure is
provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
5

Fig. 5 | PCA plots showing separation between pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight and post-
ﬂight JAXA astronaut samples, based on variation in expression for genes of
interest. Separation between pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight and post-ﬂight samples is pri-
marily visible along PC1, using A trans-acting factors and B globin genes as features
for the JAXA astronaut cohort. For the trans-acting factors, four principal compo-
nents are shown due to variance percentage contributions. Separation by ﬂight
status is visible in the PC1 vs PC2 plots for both globin genes (bottom) and trans-
acting factors (top). Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
6

In both the NASA twins study (Fig. 2) and for the Inspiration4 crew
(Fig. 6), speciﬁc blood cellular fractions were separately analysed for
expression of different genes, with the LD and CPT fractions being
considered as most relevant for investigation of alpha and beta-globin
gene expression in the NASA Twins study, given that they are expected
to contain the erythroid blood component. For the NASA twins study,
differential expression analysis showcased particular genes of interest
with signiﬁcant up-regulation and down-regulation between different
ﬂight status samples (Fig. 2). However, relevant observations are also
quoted from the non-erythroid cellular fractions, especially where
trends were congruent with those observed in cell-free RNA-seq results
for the JAXA astronauts. Such comparisons are expected to be of more
importance when looking at transcription factors and are done while
keeping in mind other physiological data as obtained across several
different astronaut cohorts, as provided in Fig. 10.
Discussion
The switch from fetal to adult haemoglobin after birth is well-known
but not fully understood. Certain diseases show a reversed gene
switch, with higher fetal haemoglobin linked to milder symptoms. In
microgravity, astronauts experience a decrease in red blood cells,
possibly due to bone mineral density loss12,13. This space-induced mild
anaemia is intriguing for understanding mechanisms seen in clinical
anaemia. The research looked into genes involved in haemoglobin
production, noting similarities between astronaut and clinical anaemia
in blood cell count changes.
Gene expression analysis for the alpha and beta-globin loci
At the alpha globin coding locus, a strong trend of down-regulation
during ﬂight was noted for the JAXA astronauts for the HBA1 and HBA2
genes (for the duration of readings from 5 days after launch to 60 days
after launch), followed by an observed up-regulation in expression
immediately upon return to ground, even higher than expression
recorded pre-ﬂight. A similar up-regulation was observed in the NASA
Twins study, where an increase in expression of the two genes was
noted in the CD19 cellular fraction when comparing pre-ﬂight and
post-ﬂight conditions. For HBA1, this was complemented with a sig-
niﬁcant strong down-regulation observed in CD4 cells when compar-
ing in-ﬂight against pre-ﬂight conditions. In the CD8 fraction, post-
ﬂight readings showed up-regulation even when comparing it with
combined pre-ﬂight and in-ﬂight values. For HBA1 and HBA2 expres-
sion in the Inspiration4 cohort, signiﬁcant up-regulation from pre-
ﬂight levels was reported post-ﬂight immediately upon return, with
levels returning to pre-ﬂight levels in subsequent post-ﬂight readings.
These observations seem to suggest that spaceﬂight down-
regulates expression of genes involved in alpha globin protein pro-
duction, with post-ﬂight up-regulation suggesting a recovery period
(which period seemed to last until even 120 days after the astronauts’
return). This up-regulation upon return also plays a role in the
response to an overall loss of red blood cell count, a well-documented
occurrence in astronauts (referred to as space anaemia) which
manifests itself as a mild form of anaemia, as showcased by a slight
lowering of red blood cell count across several different astronauts in
Fig. ﬁg:expression_physiology. It is to be noted that mutations in the
HBA1 and HBA2 gene in patients is normally manifested as alpha-tha-
lassaemia, an inherited disorder that can range in severity from a mild
form of anaemia to very severe anaemia in combination with several
other clinical characteristics, such as hepatosplenomegaly and cardi-
ovascular deformities, typically leading to fetal death14,15.
An observation of note was made in the JAXA study with HBM and
its paralog, HBZ, which is involved in the production of the zeta-globin
polypeptide in embryos16,17. While expression for both remained low in
ﬂight, expression of HBZ increased brieﬂy immediately upon return
while expression of HBM had a delayed up-regulation, with increased
expression only recorded 60 days after return to ground. Strong HBM
up-regulation was also recorded post-ﬂight for the ﬂight twin when
comparing the CD19 cell fraction with the ground twin.
On the beta-globin coding locus, for the JAXA cohort, the HBB
gene shows a reduction in expression observed during ﬂight, fol-
lowed by an increase in expression post-ﬂight, surpassing expression
even beyond what was observed pre-ﬂight and mirroring observa-
tions made for HBA1 and HBA2 in the alpha globin coding locus. The
HBB gene is known to directly code for the production of beta-glo-
bins, an essential sub-unit in adult haemoglobin. This seems to sug-
gest that post-ﬂight recovery for astronauts in this study seemed to
involve enhanced expression of HBB, possibly in an attempt to
recover previous repression experienced through spaceﬂight or as
part of an overall recovery of red blood cell count in RBC-depleted
astronaut blood. For the NASA Twins study, similar up-regulation was
seen for HBB when comparing post-ﬂight CD8 cell fractions with
ground twin levels, with similar observations for HBG1 and HBG2. For
the Inspiration4 crew, HBB gene expression was higher than pre-
ﬂight levels immediately after return but then returned to pre-ﬂight
levels.
Additionally, in-ﬂight readings for HBG1 and HBG2 in the NASA
Twins study showed down-regulation when compared to pre-ﬂight and
post-ﬂight levels, for both the CD4 and CD8 cell fractions, as was also
the case for HBB expression. Interestingly, such observations were not
made for HBG1 in the JAXA CFE study, where more sporadic regulation
ﬂuctuations were observed. It was however observed, for the JAXA
astronauts, that an up-regulation of HBG2 was recorded in ﬂight. HBG2
is normally expressed in fetal bone marrow, liver and spleen, while
HBE1, the epsilon globin gene, is normally expressed only at the
embryonic stage. For HBE1, a similar up-regulation in ﬂight was
observed in both the JAXA astronaut cohort and in the NASA Twins
study, speciﬁcally when considering the CD8 cell fraction. HBG2 was
also up-regulated in post-ﬂight readings for the Inspiration4 crew
when compared to measured pre-ﬂight levels.
Such observations seem to suggest that a globin switch is also
activated in the beta-globin coding locus, with a preference for globin
chains with higher oxygen afﬁnity than those observed in embryonic
and fetal haemoglobin. It is hence reasonable to suggest that similar
Fig. 6 | Normalised expression values for select globin genes and trans-acting
factors for the Inspiration 4 crew. Genes and trans-acting factors selected are
those known to be involved in the globin gene switch mechanism and/or
erythropoiesis before, before and after spaceﬂight, at speciﬁc intervals, for the
PBMCs cellular fraction for the Inspiration4 astronaut crew. Source data for the
ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
7

Fig. 7 | Heat-map showcasing z-scores for normalised expression of several
different globin genes and trans-acting factors of interest for plasma cell-free
samples, with pre-ﬂight/post-ﬂight status indicated, for the Inspiration4 crew.
L−indicates days before ﬂight, and R+ indicates days after ﬂight for different
obtained samples from the crew. Genes and trans-acting factors showcased are
those known to be involved in the globin gene switch mechanism and/or ery-
thropoiesis. Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
8

observed changes in other genes or transcription factors mayalso have
an effect on the regulation of such a globin switch.
Gene expression analysis for other erythropoietic/globin-switch
genes and associated transcription factors
A cohort of other genes, known to be involved in a number of different
pathways in erythropoiesis, was investigated. The ALAS2 gene
was found to be heavily up-regulated immediately after the JAXA
astronauts’ return, an observation also mirrored in the NASA Twins
study,
where
increased
expression
was
observed
post-ﬂight
when comparing to ground twin levels in CD4, CD8 and CPT cellular
fractions, together with up-regulation when comparing to the ﬂight
twin’s expression before and in-ﬂight combined in CD8 cells. The gene is
involved in the development stage for erythroblasts, speciﬁcally in the
production of 5’-aminolevulinate synthase 218 - it is indeed involved in
the catalysis of this haem precursor19. Its up-regulation might indicate
an increased rate of erythrocyte production in post-ﬂight recovery. A
similar increase post-ﬂight was noted in the expression of the CD44
gene, known to be involved in erythropoiesis. Previous studies with
patients suffering from myelodysplastic syndromes, wherein red blood
cells do not achieve full maturity in the bone marrow, have shown an
increased expression of CD44 in sick individuals20. Down-regulation in-
ﬂight and up-regulation post-ﬂight were also observed in both the NASA
Twins study (when looking at the LD cellular fraction) and the JAXA
cohort when considering the E2F2 gene, which is a known negative
regulator of haem oxygenase-1 (HO-1) - with enhanced expression of
E2F2 resulting in lowered HO-1 levels and vice versa20. Since HO-1 cat-
alysers the degradation of haem, the reduction of expression of E2F2 in-
ﬂight may be one of the contributing factors resulting in space anaemia.
For the Inspiration4 crew, post-ﬂight up-regulation was also observed
for E2F2 in both PBMCs and cell-free RNA.
FLVCR1 was shown to have perturbed expression with phases of
up-regulation observed both in-ﬂight and post-ﬂight in the JAXA
cohort and also in post-ﬂight readings taken for the Inspiration4 crew.
This gene is known to be crucial, particularly in early erythropoiesis
and encodes for two haem exporters, with FLCVR1a being involved in
the expansion of erythroid cell progenitors and FLCVR1b being crucial
for differentiation of said progenitors into mature erythroid cells21.
Indeed, reduced expression of this gene is particularly observed in
Diamond Blackfan anaemia22. Its up-regulation in both ﬂight and post-
ﬂight observations could be seen as a response to ameliorate space
anaemia, although such up-regulation was not observed in the NASA
Twins study.
Transcription, or trans-acting factors, refers to elements that act
to control and regulate gene expression through binding on speciﬁc
Fig. 8 | PCA plot showcasing separation between pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight
samples for the plasma cell-free samples from the Inspiration4 crew. The ﬁrst
two principal components are shown, accounting for around 60% of all variance
across the features of interest in the data (globin genes and trans-acting factors) for
the plasma cell-free samples obtained from the Inspiration4 crew. A separation
between pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight samples along the ﬁrst principal component is
discernible. Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Fig. 9 | Diagram showcasing normalised values of globin miRNA expression in the NASA Twins study. Selected spatiotemporal comparisons of a number of globin
miRNAs in different cellular fractions are presented. Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
9

regions of the genome, referred to as cis-acting or trans-acting ele-
ments and resulting in the promotion or repression of other genes.
Several such transcription factors may work in tandem, and a number
of genes can have several transcription factors affecting their expres-
sion, directly or indirectly. A number of such trans-acting factors have
been investigated in this study, with some having a more pronounced
and direct effect in erythropoiesis. While both MBD2 and MBD3 were
found to be down-regulated during normal erythropoiesis in murine
model bone marrow, MBD2 down-regulation was particularly shown to
be crucial for erythropoiesis20. MBD2 promotes the degradation of
CP2c family proteins, and thus its up-regulation would result in the
overall down-regulation of globin gene expression23. MBD2 levels were
shown to be down-regulated during ﬂight for the JAXA astronauts, with
levels returning to pre-ﬂight levels after returning to the ground. This
suggests a reaction to the increased rate of haemolysis known to be
experienced in ﬂight. However, it must be noted that overall globin
gene expression was noted to decrease, rather than increase, during
ﬂight. A number of other trans-acting factors showed an increased
expression in the ﬁrst few days after arriving at the ISS, with sub-
sequent in-ﬂight levels going down. It has been shown, in separate
studies, that a signiﬁcant reduction in red blood cell count is observed
in the ﬁrst few days of spaceﬂight, after which red blood cell count
stabilises to almost pre-ﬂight levels11. This seems to indicate that a
number of trans-acting factors closely follow haemolytic and red blood
cell counts in astronaut cohorts observed in this study.
BCL11A is
a
well-known
repressor
of gamma-globin
gene
expression6,24–26, with down-regulation in its expression observed in-
ﬂight in the NASA Twins study (when looking at the CD4 cellular
fraction) and up-regulation noted post-ﬂight in the same study. Down-
regulation in BCL11A was also noted in ﬂight for the JAXA astronauts.
Similar observations were made for SOX6 in the JAXA astronaut
cohort, which is known to coordinate gamma-globin expression with
BCL11A via proximal promoter binding on the gamma-globin genes27.
These observations suggest that BCL11A and SOX6 expression was
reduced in ﬂight, due to space anaemia, to allow the increased
expression of gamma-globin, which was indeed observed to some
extent in the JAXA study but not observed in the NASA Twins study. For
BCL11A, although in-ﬂight readings were not available for the Inspira-
tion4 astronauts, up-regulation in expression was noted post-ﬂight.
Similar observations were made in the JAXA cohort with ZBTB7A,
another known down-regulator for gamma-globin gene expression28,29,
although no such observation was recorded in the NASA Twins study,
where a slight post-ﬂight down-regulation, when compared to pre-
ﬂight and in-ﬂight levels, was noted. A post-ﬂight increase in expres-
sion for ZBTB7A was however also observed in the Inspiration4 crew.
Conversely, the expression of Lin28b was found to be somewhat
increased in select measurements taken in-ﬂight for the JAXA astro-
nauts, as well as in the NASA twins study when looking at the CPT
cellular fraction. This gene is known to be involved in the increased
expression of fetal haemoglobin, with its increased expression in adult
erythroblasts showing a subsequent increased expression of gamma-
globin30. This also suggests that an overall switch towards the pro-
duction of fetal haemoglobin was activated in ﬂight.
Conversely, it was found that expression of Sin3A was down-
regulated in ﬂight in the JAXA astronaut cohort as well as in the NASA
twins study (LD cellular fraction), with the gene known to be down-
regulated to allow for the prevalence of higher fetal haemoglobin
levels31. Indeed, Sin3A is known to worsen Beta-thalassaemia severity,
possibly inhibiting the action of KLF10 which is known to ameliorate
symptoms in a range of Beta-Haemoglobinopathies32. NR2C2 expres-
sion levels were also observed to decrease in ﬂight in the JAXA cohort,
which further seems to point towards an overall shift towards the
expression of fetal haemoglobin. Indeed, NR2C2 is known to be
involved as a direct transcriptional repressor of both embryonic and
fetal haemoglobin33–35. The expression of NR2C2 was observed to
decrease in-ﬂight when considering the LD fraction of cells for the
NASA Twins study as well. Another interesting observation was made
with the CHD4 gene, with down-regulation noted during ﬂight for the
JAXA cohort, following up-regulation to pre-ﬂight levels after return to
Earth. CHD4 has been shown to increase the expression of both KLF1
and BCL11A, with its knockdown shown to result in higher expression
of gamma-globin36. This follows the other observations made in the
Fig. 10 | Diagram showcasing a number of physiological parameters for a
cohort of astronauts from across multiple missions. The ﬁgure indicates levels
of different parameters before, during and after ﬂight and also denotes the sample
size for every reading, as showcased by the included legend. The number of
astronauts, n, refers to the number of astronauts for whom a particular data-point
was calculated, with a standard error (SEM) indicated for every data-point
accordingly. Source data for the ﬁgure is provided in the Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
10

same astronaut cohort concerning BCL11A and KLF1. It must be noted,
however, that the same observation was not made in the NASA Twins
study, with up-regulation of CHD4 actually being noted in-ﬂight in this
case. For the Inspiration4 crew, delayed up-regulation of expression of
CHD4 was noted post-ﬂight, when compared to pre-ﬂight levels, with
expression levels eventually falling back to pre-ﬂight levels.
In addition, KLF1 showed a signiﬁcant up-regulation in expression
post-ﬂight for the JAXA cohort, after having shown slight down-
regulation in expression in-ﬂight. In the NASA Twins study it was
shown thata signiﬁcant down-regulation of KLF1 was observed in-ﬂight
followed by up-regulation post-ﬂight, when looking at the CD8 cellular
fraction for the ﬂight twin. The KLF1 gene encodes for Kruppel-
like factor 1, a transcription factor known to be involved in positive
regulationof the BCL11A gene6,25. It has also been shown that mutations
in
the
beta-globin
CACC
box
prevent
KLF1
binding,
causing
β-thalassaemia6 KLF1 is indeed also known to be involved in the
expression of beta-globin25, and the fact that the expression of KLF1 in-
ﬂight is somewhat reduced from the base expression observed pre-
ﬂight indicates that the production of adult beta-globins may be
somewhat repressed, which would correlate with observations made
in the expression of HBB, as aforementioned. Conversely, observations
of expression of the MYB gene showed an overall reduction in
expression in ﬂight and a somewhat increased expression post-ﬂight
for the JAXA astronauts, with post-ﬂight expression of MYB also
increasing upon return for the Inspiration4 crew. Interestingly, a
similar trend in expression is also seen in the NASA Twins study when
considering the CD4 and CD8 cellular fractions, although an opposite
observation was made in the ﬂight expression of MYB measured for
the LD cellular fraction. An in-ﬂight repression and increased post-
ﬂight expression of MYB is in line with expectations for an in-ﬂight
adult to fetal globin switch, given that MYB is known to support ery-
thropoiesis through activation of KLF1 and LMO2 expression37, with
KLF1 being a gamma-globin repressor.
EPO is one of the hallmark genes for the promotion of ery-
thropoiesis, known to typically be up-regulated in hypoxic conditions38.
It encodes for a glycosylated cytokine, erythropoietin, that binds to the
erythropoietin receptor, promoting red blood cell production in the
bone marrow39. EPO was found to be signiﬁcantly down-regulated in-
ﬂight and up-regulated post-ﬂight in the JAXA cohort, but remaining
mostly at stable levels in both the Inspiration4 study and the NASA
Twins study (for the latter, slight down-regulation post-ﬂight was
instead noted in the LD cell fraction). The observation made in the JAXA
cohort seems to be in congruence with the observed phenotype of
space anaemia, suggesting that the down-regulation of EPO in ﬂight, as
observed for the JAXA astronauts, might have had a negative effect on
erythropoiesis and thus contributed to space anaemia. Observations of
the EIF2AK1 gene show signiﬁcant up-regulation in-ﬂight in the JAXA
astronauts, although similar observations were not made in the NASA
Twins study. This gene is one of several known essential genes for
erythropoiesis, and its activation under oxidative stress conditions has
been shown to result in erythroid differentiation via activation of the
ATF4 signalling pathway40. The ATF4 gene itself was found to be down-
regulated post-ﬂight, when compared to in-ﬂight levels, for both the
JAXA cohort and in the NASA Twins study, when considering the CPT
cell fraction.
Other genes known to be heavily involved in erythropoietic
pathways showed notable variation. Particularly, the ACVR1B gene
showed signiﬁcant down-regulation in-ﬂight and up-regulation post-
ﬂight, both in the NASA Twins study (when looking at LD cell fractions)
and in the JAXA cohort. With this gene known to be a positive regulator
of differentiation of erythrocytes, these observations suggest that one
possible manner in which overall red blood cell counts decrease in
astronauts in microgravity could be through disruption of expression
of such genes, resulting in slower rates of erythroid differentiation and
hence maturity. Conversely, however, ARID1B was also shown to be
down-regulated in ﬂight for the JAXA astronauts, with this gene known
to be involved in erythropoiesis suppression. Indeed, knockdown on
ARID1B has been shown to result in a hundred-fold increase in red
blood cell count in hypoxic conditions41. ARID1B knockdown is also
known to increase the expression of GATA1 by three-fold41, with GATA1
being involved in the differentiation of embryonic stem cells to mature
erythrocytes42,43. Thus, the down-regulation of ARID1B could be inter-
preted as a response mechanism for space anaemia, with its reduced
expression possibly opposing the reduced red blood cell counts in
astronauts in ﬂight.
Observations of the prevalence of GATA1 expression showed
some up-regulation in ﬂight in the JAXA astronauts, with a more pro-
nounced increase in GATA1 expression in this cohort seen post-ﬂight.
In the NASA Twins study, post-ﬂight up-regulation was noted in GATA1
expression, when compared to pre-ﬂight and in-ﬂight levels in the LD
cell fraction. This seems to suggest that if the increased expression of
ARID1B had an ameliorating effect on space anaemia while in-ﬂight in
this case, this was likely achieved through pathways other than GATA1-
mediated differentiation and erythroid maturation. On the other hand,
the increased expression of ARID1B in ﬂight might have also had a
delayed response in increased GATA1 expression (observed post-
ﬂight) and thus amelioration of astronauts post-ﬂight could be in part
attributed to the observed GATA1 up-regulation. Conversely, the
expression of LDB1 was observed to undergo up-regulation in-ﬂight
when compared with both pre-ﬂight and post-ﬂight levels in the NASA
Twins study data, when considering the LD cellular fraction only. LDB1
is known to operate in synergy with other transcription factors such as
KLF1, GATA1 and TAL1, facilitating the recruitment of LDB1-nucleated
protein complexes to activation sites for alpha and beta-globin genes
via long-distance interactions44. Since both alpha and beta-globin gene
overall expression was actually observed to decrease in ﬂight, parti-
cularly in the JAXA cohort, this may indicate that the up-regulated
expression of LDB1 in ﬂight may in fact be one method of counter-
action for overall reduced adult globin genes observed in space
anaemia.
It was indeed observed that while some transcription factors
involved in erythropoiesis regulation showed in-ﬂight variation in
expression, others only showcased a change in expression post-ﬂight.
TAL1, a known haematopoiesis regulator and known to be essential for
erythropoiesis45–47, showed in-ﬂight up-regulation and post-ﬂight
down-regulation in the JAXA cohort as well as in the NASA twin
study (LD cell fraction). However, LMO2, which is also known to be
involved in haematopoiesis and essential for erythropoiesis47, showed
increased expression post-ﬂight only. The JAXA astronauts also
showed a slight in-ﬂight increase coupled with a post-ﬂight down-
regulation in the expression of NFE2, with a similar post-ﬂight down-
regulation observed in the NASA twin study (CD4 cell fraction). NFE2
plays a role in erythroid maturation, involved in controlling the tran-
scription of erythroid-speciﬁc genes48. In addition, NFE2 is also
involved in the activation of PBGD49 and FECH50, two enzymes involved
in haem biosynthesis. This suggests that the up-regulation of NFE2 may
be an in-ﬂight response to counter space anaemia.
The expression of miRNAs involved in erythropoiesis and globin
expression
Micro RNAs (miRNAs) constitute an important regulatory mechanism
at a post-transcriptional level, binding to messenger RNA (mRNA) and
typically resulting in repression of expression, a mechanism termed
gene silencing. A number of such miRNAs involved in the regulation of
globin expression have been identiﬁed in previous studies. Apart from
being involved in the regulation of globin gene expression, globin
miRNAs have also been shown to play a role in the switch between
embryonic and fetal haemoglobin, as well as the regulation of adult
globin. Speciﬁcally, a number of miRNAs have been identiﬁed as hav-
ing an effect on the expression of a number of transcription factors
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
11

involved in the induction of fetal haemoglobin. An example of such
miRNAs includes miR-15a, miR-16-1, miR-23a, miR-26b, miR-27a and
miR-451, which have been shown to modulate the effects of a number
of transcription factors including BCL11A, MYB, KLF3 and Sp1, resulting
in an increase in fetal haemoglobin production while suppressing beta-
globin expression51,52.
Globin miRNA levels measured from the NASA Twins study
demonstrated signiﬁcant changes in selected miRNA expression
levels
recorded
during
ﬂight
and
post-ﬂight.
Figure
ﬁg:ex-
pression_mirnas_NASA shows normalised expression levels subdivided
across a number of cellular fractions. Among these, the LD cellular
fraction as well as the CPT fraction contain the erythroid portion of the
cellular fractions here considered. A lower expression of nearly all
miRNAs investigated was recorded during ﬂight in these two fractions,
except for miR-150-3p and miR-23a-5p, when compared against the
expression recorded post-ﬂight. Similar trends were also observed
when assessing a number of miRNAs in the CD19 cellular fraction for
expression before ﬂight and expression after ﬂight, while an opposite
trend was observed for the CD4 cells, with higher pre-ﬂight expression
than post-ﬂight expression. For the purposes of obtaining meaningful
comparisons, ground twin expression values were not considered for
discussion due to the high variation observed when comparing both
twins pre-ﬂight, suggesting strong individual variations.
The down-regulation observed in-ﬂight, followed by a stronger
expression post-ﬂight in the erythroid cell fractions (LD and CPT)
seems to suggest that the investigated miRNAs may indeed play a
signiﬁcant role in the observed globin gene expression values pro-
vided in Fig. ﬁg:expression_mirnas_NASA. Indeed, the down-regulation
of investigated miRNAs in the erythroid fractions coincides with the
down-regulation of expression of adult globin genes on the alpha and
beta-globin loci. Additionally, an increased expression of the same
miRNAs on return to the ground after ﬂight also coincides with an
increased expression of alpha and beta-globin genes, as well as a
number of transcription factors, a trend observed in the NASA Twins
study, in the JAXA astronaut cohort and the Inspiration4 crew.
Concluding remarks
It was observed that overall adult globin gene expression was repres-
sed in ﬂight, while fetal globin gene expression was enhanced. Several
genes coding for transcription factors known to be involved in the
fetal-to-adult haemoglobin switch also showed variable expression
between pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight and post-ﬂight conditions. Indeed, such
observations, discussed in this study, seem to indicate that an adult-to-
fetal globin switch mechanism is indeed activated in-ﬂight, with post-
ﬂight amelioration of space anaemia seeing a reversion of expression
back to normal healthy adult levels.
Several of the observed changes followed an in-ﬂight shift in favour
of fetal haemoglobin, with increased expression of genes involved in
gamma-globin expression and repression of genes normally involved in
beta-globin gene expression, or involved in repression of gamma-globin
genes themselves (such as BCL11A and KLF1). These observations seem
to indicate that fetal haemoglobin expression is favoured in ﬂight, as
seen in several haemoglobinopathies where the expression of fetal
haemoglobin tends to have an ameliorating effect. This suggests that
the observed in-ﬂight switch may be a similar mechanism, in this case, to
combat the effects of space anaemia. In this regard, future studies will
make direct measurements of fetal haemoglobin, to shed light on the
direct effects of such known haemoglobin switch actors on the actual
levels of fetal haemoglobin in spaceﬂight and afterward.
In addition, a number of genes that play a role in erythropoiesis
were also found to be perturbed in ﬂight, in some cases suggesting that
the observed space anaemia condition may not only be a result of
increased haemolysis but also due to down-regulation in the expression
of certain genes known to play an important positive regulatory role in
erythropoiesis. A number of other genes involved in erythropoiesis
were seen to increase in expression in-ﬂight as well, possibly suggesting
that these could act as a response mechanism, during ﬂight itself, to the
anaemic condition. Some of these genes, as with the globin switch
mechanism, only showed a delayed expression variability in post-ﬂight
readings, suggesting that they might be involved in increasing ery-
thropoiesis rates after landing. Indeed, astronauts have been observed
to recover total erythroid cell counts in the weeks following return from
spaceﬂight, effectively recovering from space anaemia.
While our study provides comprehensive insights into the impact
of spaceﬂight on astronaut blood samples, we acknowledge the lim-
itation regarding the diverse duration of exposure. Due to logistical
constraints, our analysis primarily focuses on a speciﬁc time frame.
Future research with extended mission duration would undoubtedly
enhance our understanding of the temporal dynamics involved, and
we encourage further exploration in this area to broaden the scope of
our ﬁndings.
Methods
NASA twins study RNA-seq analysis
Speciﬁc details related to all the methods for the NASA Twins Study
RNA-seq data can be found in the following references9,53. Brieﬂy, the
NASA Twins Study involved two male twin subjects, aged 50 years old
at the time of launch. The ﬂight twin spent 340 days aboard the ISS
while his identical twin stayed on Earth as the ground control.
Blood samples were collected into 4 mL CPT tubes (BD Bios-
ciences Cat No.362760) as per the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Cell separation was performed by centrifugation at 1800 × g for 20 min
at room temperature, both on the ISS and for the ground-based sam-
ples. Ambient blood collected samples slated for immediate return on
Soyuz capsule were stored at 4 °C until processing (average of 35–37 h
after collection, including repatriation time). Samples collected on
Earth and the ISS and planned for long-term storage were mixed by
inversion and immediately frozen at −80 °C.
Fresh processing of CPT tubes was performed as follows. Firstly,
plasma was retrieved from the CPT tubes and ﬂash frozen prior to
long-term storage at −80 °C. Secondly, the peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells (PBMCs) were recovered and washed in PBS. 0.5 million
PBMCs were retrieved from one pre-ﬂight and one post-ﬂight sample,
pelleted, ﬂash frozen and stored at −80 °C until use for RNA extrac-
tions. The ﬂow through from cell sorting steps was recovered as the
lymphocyte depleted (LD) fraction; LD and PBMC cell specimens were
lysed into RLT+ buffer (Qiagen Cat No.1053393), ﬂash frozen and
stored at −80 °C until use.
Cells were isolated and prepared using the BD Rhapsody platform
according to the BD Rhapsody Express Single-Cell Analysis System
Instrument User Guide, with a custom-designed RNA and epitope
panel. Brieﬂy, cells from each sample were labelled with sample tags
and then pooled after being washed twice with FACS buffer. Combined
samples were then washed an additional time before being stained
with the BD AbSeq Ab-Oligo reagents. After staining, the cells were
washed twice before resuspension at approximately 20,000 cells in
620 μL. These cells were then isolated using the Single-Cell Analysis
System and cDNA Synthesis with the BD Rhapsody Express Single-Cell
Analysis System using the manufacturers’ protocol (BD Biosciences).
Cells were loaded onto 3 BD Rhapsody nanowell cartridges. Cartridges
were loaded with Cell Capture Beads (BD Biosciences) before shaking
for 15 s at 1000 rpm. Cells were lysed and cell capture beads were
retrieved and washed prior to Exonuclease I treatment and reverse
transcription.
Targeted ampliﬁcation of cDNA with the Human Immune
Response Panel primers and custom supplemental panel was done
through 10 PCR cycles. PCR products were puriﬁed, and mRNA and
AbSeq products were separated by SPRIselect beads with double-sided
selection. mRNA products were ampliﬁed further with 15 PCR cycles.
Final libraries were indexed with 8 PCR cycles. Library quality was
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
12

assessed by Bioanalyzer (D1000 HS, Agilent). Library DNA concentra-
tion was quantiﬁed using a Qubit dsDNA HS Kit (ThermoFisher,
No.Q32854) on a Qubit Fluorometer. Libraries were diluted to 2 nM
and multiplexed before being sequenced on three lanes of a Novaseq-
6000. The mean read depth per cell was 13,244.31 mRNA reads per cell
and 11,506.98 AbSeq reads per cell for a combined 243,751.30 reads
per cell.
FASTQ ﬁles were uploaded to Seven Bridges Genomics. Data was
demultiplexed and sequences analysed with BD’s Rhapsody pipeline
(BD Rhapsody Analysis Pipeline 1.4 Beta) on Seven Bridges (www.
sevenbridges.com). Data was then loaded into Seurat (version 3.2.0)
for analysis54. This generated a sparse matrix ﬁle of features by bar-
codes. This sparse matrix data was then read into R using the R
package Seurat 3.2.0, and standard quality control was run to remove
cells with few genes. Data was then scaled and normalised. MAST55 was
used to determine DEGs between all combinations of pre-ﬂight, return
and post-ﬂight for both TW and HR samples. Heatmaps were made for
the curated globin genes on the DEG values per time point using the R
package pheatmap version 1.0.12.
NASA twins study miRNA-Seq analysis
Speciﬁc details related to all the methods related to the NASA Twins
Study miRNA-seq data can also be found in the provided references9,53.
We will brieﬂy highlight the key methods. Small RNA libraries were
prepared from 50ng total RNA using the NEBNext Multiplex Small RNA
Library Prep Set for Illumina (NEB No.E7560) per manufacturer’s
recommendations with the following modiﬁcations: adaptors and RT
primer were diluted fourfold, 17 cycles of PCR were used for library
ampliﬁcation, and no size selection was performed. The i7 primers in
the NEBNext Multiplex Oligos for Illumina Dual Index Primers (NEB
No.E7600, NEB No.E7780) were used to supplement the index primers
in NEB No.E7560. The libraries were sequenced in an Illumina NextSeq
instrument (1 × 50bp).
Standard libraries were pre-processed and quality-controlled
using miRTrace56. Subsequently, reads were mapped against MirGen-
eDB sequences57 using the miRDeep258 quantiﬁer module. Expression
values were normalised to reads per million (RPM) considering only
miRNA counts. The normalised RPM value was utilised for all analysis.
If the value for the miRNA was zero for all samples that miRNA was
excluded from the analysis. To determine statistically signiﬁcant
miRNAs, ANOVA analysis with p-value < 0.2 was independently per-
formed for each cell type.
For ﬂight-only comparisons, the same statistical signiﬁcance was
applied for all time points excluding the ground samples and all
ambient return samples. All statistics were run independently for each
cell condition/type. To determine the overlap of the miRNA signature
in this paper with the Twins Study miRNA-seq data, the proposed
miRNAs were used as well as all mature components of the miRNAs
included in the miRNA family. Speciﬁc miRNAs related to globin
pathways were plotted as heatmaps on the expression values using the
R package pheatmap version 1.0.12.
JAXA CFE epigenome study: RNA quantiﬁcation data
Aggregated RNA differential expression data and study protocols were
shared through NASA’s Open Science Data Repository with accession
number: OSD-53059. Plasma cell-free RNA samples for RNA-seq analysis
were derived from blood samples collected from 6 astronauts before,
during, and after the spaceﬂight on the ISS. Mean expression values
were obtained from normalised read counts of 6 astronauts for each
time point. Heatmaps were computed for the curated globin genes on
the normalised values per time point using the R package pheatmap
version 1.0.12. Differential expression analysis was carried out with
DESEQ2, and subsequent volcano plots were plotted using Python’s
Matplotlib package. Principal component analysis was carried out
using Python’s sklearn package.
Inspiration4: data collection and analysis
Detailed methods for sample collection and data processing are
described in ref. 60. In summary, blood samples were collected before
(pre-launch: L-92, L-44, and L-3) and after (return; R+1, R+45, and R+82)
the spaceﬂight. Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’ v2, 10x Genomics
was used to generate single-cell data from isolated PBMCs. Sub-
populations were annotated based on Azimuth human PBMC refer-
ence. The Seurat R package was used to normalise RNA count data and
calculate the average expression of each gene.
For the plasma cf-RNA, plasma samples were collected in cf-DNA
Blood Collection (Streck: #230470) tubes at each time point and
stored at −80 °C. Plasma samples were thawed at room temperature
and subsequently centrifuged at 1300 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. cfRNA was
isolated from the plasma supernatant (300–800 µL) using the Norgen
Plasma/Serum Circulating and Exosomal RNA Puriﬁcation Mini Kit
(Catalogue No. 51000, Norgen). Next, 10 mL of DNase Turbo Buffer
(Catalogue No. AM2238, Invitrogen), 3 mL of DNase Turbo (Catalogue
No. AM2238, Invitrogen), and 1 mL of Baseline Zero DNase (Catalogue
No. DB0715K, Lucigen-Epicentre) was added to the extracted RNA and
incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Subsequently, the treated RNA was
concentrated into a ﬁnal volume of 12 mL with the Zymo RNA Clean
and Concentrate Kit (Catalogue No. R1015, Zymo).
Sequencing libraries were prepared from 8 µL of concentrated RNA
using the Takara SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit v3—Pico Input
Mammalian (634485, Takara) and barcoded using the SMARTer RNA
Unique Dual Index Kit (634451, Takara). Library concentration was
quantiﬁed using a Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Q33216, Invitrogen) with the
dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Q32854, Invitrogen). Libraries were quality-
controlled using an Agilent Fragment Analyser 5200 (M5310AA, Agilent)
with the HS NGS Fragment kit (DNF 474-0500, Agilent). Libraries were
pooled to equal concentrations and sequenced at the Cornell Genomics
Core on an Illumina NextSeq 2000 machine using 150-base pair, paired-
end sequencing for an average of 26 million reads per sample.
All human astronaut subjects have consented at an informed
consent brieﬁng (ICB) at SpaceX (Hawthorne, CA), and samples were
collected and processed under the approval of the Institutional Review
Board (IRB) at Weill Cornell Medicine, under Protocol 21-05023569. All
crew members have consented to data and sample sharing. JAXA and
NASA astronaut data dissemination follows agency protocols.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The JAXA CFE data is available via the NASA Open Science Data
Repository’s (OSDR)’s Biological Data Management Environment
(https://osdr.nasa.gov/bio/) with accession numbers: OSD-5302, DOI:
10.26030/r2xr-h714. Deposited data from the sequencing data from
the NASA Twin Study can be found on the NASA Life Sciences Data
Archive (LSDA) and the accession code is not available due to privacy
concerns. LSDA is the repository for all human and animal research
data, including that associated with this study. LSDA has a public-
facing portal where data requests can be initiated (https://nlsp.nasa.
gov/explore/lsdahome/datarequest). The LSDA team provides the
appropriate processes, tools, and secure infrastructure for the archival
of experimental data and dissemination while complying with applic-
able rules, regulations, policies, and procedures governing the man-
agement and archival of sensitive data and information. The LSDA
team enables data and information dissemination to the public or to
authorised personnel either by providing public access to information
or via an approved request process for information and data from the
LSDA in accordance with NASA Human Research Programme and JSC
Institutional Review Board direction. The Inspiration4 data has been
uploaded to two data repositories: the NASA Open Science Data
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
13

Repository (osdr.nasa.gov; comprised of NASA GeneLab and the NASA
Ames Life Sciences Data Archive (ALSDA)), and the TrialX database.
Identiﬁers for publicly downloadable datasets in the OSDR are docu-
mented as follows: Data can be visualised online through the SOMA
Browser
(https://epigenetics.weill.cornell.edu/apps/I4_Multiome/),
the
single-cell
browser
(https://soma.weill.cornell.edu/apps/I4_
Multiome/), and the microbiome browser (https://soma.weill.cornell.
edu/apps/I4_Microbiome/). For the PBMC data, the data is available
with OSDR accession ID: OSD-570 and the following link: https://osdr.
nasa.gov/bio/repo/data/studies/OSD-570/. All source data used to
produce the ﬁgures in this study are provided in the Source Data
ﬁle. Source data are provided in this paper.
References
1.
De Santo, N. G. et al. Anemia and erythropoietin in space ﬂights. In:
Seminars in Nephrology. Vol. 25, 379–387 (Elsevier, 2005).
2.
Trudel, G., Shafer, J., Laneuville, O. & Ramsay, T. Characterizing the
effect of exposure to microgravity on anemia: more space is worse.
Am. J. Hematol. 95, 267–273 (2020).
3.
Borg, J., Patrinos, G. P., Felice, A. E. & Philipsen, S. Erythroid phe-
notypes associated with klf1 mutations. Haematologica 96,
635 (2011).
4.
Atweh, G. F. et al. Hemoglobinopathies. ASH Educ. Program Book
2003, 14–39 (2003).
5.
Dzierzak, E. & Philipsen, S. Erythropoiesis: development and dif-
ferentiation. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 3, 011601 (2013).
6.
Borg, J. et al. Haploinsufﬁciency for the erythroid transcription
factor klf1 causes hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin. Nat.
Genet. 42, 801–805 (2010).
7.
Giardine, B. et al. Systematic documentation and analysis of human
genetic variation in hemoglobinopathies using the microattribution
approach. Nat. Genet. 43, 295–301 (2011).
8.
Ray, S. et al. Genelab: Omics database for spaceﬂight experiments.
Bioinformatics 35, 1753–1759 (2019).
9.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA twins study: a multi-
dimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science
364, 8650 (2019).
10.
Gertz, M. L. et al. Multi-omic, single-cell, and biochemical proﬁles of
astronauts guide pharmacological strategies for returning to grav-
ity. Cell Rep. 33, 108429 (2020).
11.
Trudel, G., Shahin, N., Ramsay, T., Laneuville, O. & Louati, H.
Hemolysis contributes to anemia during long-duration space ﬂight.
Nat. Med. 28, 59–62 (2022).
12.
Valderrábano, R. J. et al. Bone density loss is associated with blood
cell counts. J. Bone Miner. Res. 32, 212–220 (2017).
13.
Polineni, S. et al. Red and white blood cell counts are associated
with bone marrow adipose tissue, bone mineral density, and bone
microarchitecture in premenopausal women. J. Bone Miner. Res.
35, 1031–1039 (2020).
14.
Galanello, R. & Cao, A. Alpha-thalassemia. Genet. Med. 13, 83–88
(2011).
15.
Piel, F. B. & Weatherall, D. J. The α-thalassemias. N. Engl. J. Med. 371,
1908–1916 (2014).
16.
Stelzer, G. et al. The genecards suite: from gene data mining to
disease genome sequence analyses. Curr. Protoc. Bioinforma. 54,
1–30 (2016).
17.
Safran, M. et al. The GeneCards Suite. Practical Guide to Life
Science Databases. 27–56 (Current Protocols in Bioinformatics, 2021).
18.
Fujiwara, T. et al. Effect of 5-aminolevulinic acid on erythropoiesis: a
preclinical in vitro characterization for the treatment of congenital
sideroblastic anemia. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 454,
102–108 (2014).
19.
Tanimura, N. et al. Mechanism governing heme synthesis reveals a
gata factor/heme circuit that controls differentiation. EMBO Rep. 17,
249–265 (2016).
20. Laranjeira, P. et al. Expression of cd44 and cd35 during normal and
myelodysplastic erythropoiesis. Leuk. Res. 39, 361–370 (2015).
21.
Mercurio, S. et al. The heme exporter ﬂvcr1 regulates expansion and
differentiation of committed erythroid progenitors by controlling
intracellular heme accumulation. Haematologica 100, 720 (2015).
22. Rey, M. A. et al. Enhanced alternative splicing of the ﬂvcr1 gene in
diamond blackfan anemia disrupts ﬂvcr1 expression and function
that are critical for erythropoiesis. Haematologica 93, 1617–1626
(2008).
23. Kim, M. Y. et al. Mbd2-cp2c loop drives adult-type globin gene
expression and deﬁnitive erythropoiesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 46,
4933–4949 (2018).
24. Sankaran, V. G. et al. Human fetal hemoglobin expression is regu-
lated by the developmental stage-speciﬁc repressor bcl11a. Sci-
ence 322, 1839–1842 (2008).
25. Zhou, D., Liu, K., Sun, C.-W., Pawlik, K. M. & Townes, T. M. Klf1
regulates bcl11a expression and γ-to β-globin gene switching. Nat.
Genet. 42, 742–744 (2010).
26. Wilber, A., Nienhuis, A. W. & Persons, D. A. Transcriptional regula-
tion of fetal to adult hemoglobin switching: new therapeutic
opportunities. Blood 117, 3945–3953 (2011).
27.
Xu, J. et al. Transcriptional silencing of γ-globin by bcl11a involves
long-range interactions and cooperation with sox6. Genes Dev. 24,
783–798 (2010).
28. Masuda, T. et al. Transcription factors lrf and bcl11a independently
repress expression of fetal hemoglobin. Science 351, 285–289
(2016).
29. Martyn, G. E. et al. Natural regulatory mutations elevate the fetal
globin gene via disruption of bcl11a or zbtb7a binding. Nat. Genet.
50, 498–503 (2018).
30. Lee, Y. T. et al. Lin28b-mediated expression of fetal hemoglobin and
production of fetal-like erythrocytes from adult human erythro-
blasts ex vivo. Blood 122, 1034–1041 (2013).
31.
Gravia, A. et al. Correlation of sin3a genomic variants with β-
hemoglobinopathies disease severity and hydroxyurea treatment
efﬁcacy. Pharmacogenomics 17, 1785–1793 (2016).
32. Elalfy, M. S., El Sherif, N. H., Kamal, T. M. & Aly, N. H. Klf10 gene, a
secondary modiﬁer and a pharmacogenomic biomarker of hydro-
xyurea treatment among patients with hemoglobinopathies. J.
Pediatr. Hematol./Oncol. 39, 155–162 (2017).
33. Wang, G., Xu, G. & Wang, W. Long noncoding rna cdkn2b-as1
facilitates lung cancer development through regulating mir-378b/
nr2c2. OncoTargets Ther. 13, 10641 (2020).
34. Tanabe, O. et al. Embryonic and fetal β-globin gene repression by
the orphan nuclear receptors, tr2 and tr4. EMBO J. 26, 2295–2306
(2007).
35. Tanabe, O. et al. An embryonic/fetal β-type globin gene repressor
contains a nuclear receptor tr2/tr4 heterodimer. EMBO J. 21,
3434–3442 (2002).
36. Amaya, M. et al. Mi2β-mediated silencing of the fetal γ-globin gene
in adult erythroid cells. Blood 121, 3493–3501 (2013).
37. Bianchi, E. et al. c-myb supports erythropoiesis through the trans-
activation of klf1 and lmo2 expression. Blood 116, 99–110 (2010).
38. Stockmann, C. & Fandrey, J. Hypoxia-induced erythropoietin pro-
duction: a paradigm for oxygen-regulated gene expression. Clin.
Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 33, 968–979 (2006).
39. Darling, R. J. et al. Glycosylation of erythropoietin affects receptor
binding kinetics: role of electrostatic interactions. Biochemistry 41,
14524–14531 (2002).
40. Suragani, R. N. et al. Heme-regulated eIF2α kinase activated
Atf4 signaling pathway in oxidative stress and erythropoiesis. Blood
119, 5276–5284 (2012).
41.
Azad, P. et al. Arid1b, a molecular suppressor of erythropoiesis, is
essential for the prevention of Monge’s disease. Exp. Mol. Med. 54,
777–787 (2022).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
14

42. Pevny, L. et al. Erythroid differentiation in chimaeric mice blocked
by a targeted mutation in the gene for transcription factor gata-1.
Nature 349, 257–260 (1991).
43. Weiss, M. J., Keller, G. & Orkin, S. H. Novel insights into erythroid
development revealed through in vitro differentiation of gata-1
embryonic stem cells. Genes Dev. 8, 1184–1197 (1994).
44. Love, P. E., Warzecha, C. & Li, L. Ldb1 complexes: the new master
regulators of erythroid gene transcription. Trends Genet. 30,
1–9 (2014).
45. Robb, L. & Begley, C. G. The scl/tal1 gene: roles in normal and
malignant haematopoiesis. Bioessays 19, 607–613 (1997).
46. Shivdasani, R. A., Mayer, E. L. & Orkin, S. H. Absence of blood for-
mation in mice lacking the t-cell leukaemia oncoprotein tal-1/scl.
Nature 373, 432–434 (1995).
47. Wadman, I. A. et al. The lim-only protein Lmo2 is a bridging mole-
cule assembling an erythroid, DNA-binding complex which
includes the TAL1, E47, GATA-1 and Ldb1/NLI proteins. EMBO J. 16,
3145–3157 (1997).
48. Ingley, E., Tilbrook, P. A. & Klinken, S. P. New insights into the reg-
ulation of erythroid cells. IUBMB Life 56, 177–184 (2004).
49. Mignotte, V., Eleouet, J. F., Raich, N. & Romeo, P.-H. Cis-and trans-
acting elements involved in the regulation of the erythroid pro-
moter of the human porphobilinogen deaminase gene. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 86, 6548–6552 (1989).
50. Tugores, A., Magness, S. T. & Brenner, D. A. A single promoter directs
both housekeeping and erythroid preferential expression of the
human ferrochelatasegene. J. Biol. Chem.269, 30789–30797 (1994).
51.
Saki, N. et al. Microrna expression in β-thalassemia and sickle cell
disease: a role in the induction of fetal hemoglobin. Cell J. (Yakhteh)
17, 583 (2016).
52. Sankaran, V. G. et al. Microrna-15a and-16-1 act via MYB to elevate
fetal hemoglobin expression in human trisomy 13. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 108, 1519–1524 (2011).
53. Malkani, S. et al. Circulating miRNA spaceﬂight signature reveals
targets for countermeasure development. Cell Rep. 33, 108448
(2020).
54. Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell
177, 1888–1902 (2019).
55. Finak, G. et al. Mast: a ﬂexible statistical framework for assessing
transcriptional changes and characterizing heterogeneity in single-
cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 16, 1–13 (2015).
56. Kang, W. et al. miRTrace reveals the organismal origins of microRNA
sequencing data. Genome Biol. 19, 1–15 (2018).
57. Fromm, B. et al. Mirgenedb 2.0: the metazoan microrna comple-
ment. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, 132–141 (2020).
58. Friedländer, M. R., Mackowiak, S. D., Li, N., Chen, W. & Rajewsky, N.
mirdeep2 accurately identiﬁes known and hundreds of novel
microRNA genes in seven animal clades. Nucleic Acids Res. 40,
37–52 (2012).
59. Muratani, M. Cell-free RNA analysis of plasma samples collected
from six astronauts in JAXA cell-free epigenome (CFE) study. NASA
Open Science Data Repository, Version 2, 10, 2–714 (2022).
60. Overbey, E. G. et al. Collection of biospecimens from the inspira-
tion4 mission establishes the standards for the space omics and
medical atlas (SOMA). Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-48806-z (2024).
Acknowledgements
We would like to extend our gratitude to the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) for the data on their Japanese astronauts.
We also thank the SpaceX Inspiration4 astronauts for their contribution
of blood samples and data which were essential for our analysis. We
are grateful to Dr. Wasim Ahmed, CEO of Metavisionaries, for the sci-
entiﬁc funding support provided to Dr. Josef Borg, facilitated by the
Research, Innovation and Development Trust (RIDT) foundation at the
University of Malta, Malta. CEM also thanks the Scientiﬁc Computing
Unit (SCU), the WorldQuant and GI Research Foundation, NASA
(NNX14AH50G, NNX17AB26G, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2, 80NSSC22K0254,
80NSSC23K0832), the National Institutes of Health (R01ES032638,
U54AG089334), and the LLS (MCL7001-18, LLS 9238-16, 7029-23), and
Boryung for their ﬁnancial support and research guidance as well.
Author contributions
Dr. Josef Borg, Mr. Conor Loy, and Dr. JangKeun Kim performed the
experiments; contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools, or data;
and wrote the paper. Dr. Christopher Mason, Dr. Afshin Beheshti, and
Prof. Joseph Borg conceived and designed the experiments; performed
the experiments; analysed and interpreted the data; contributed
reagents, materials, analysis tools, or data; and wrote the paper. Dr.
Alfred Buhagiar, Mr. Christopher Chin, Ms. Namita Damle, Prof. Iwijn De
Vlaminck, Prof. Alex Felice, Ms. Tammy Liu, Ms. Irina Matei, Dr. Cem
Meydan, Dr. Masafumi Muratani, Mr. Omary Mzava, Dr. Eliah Overbey,
Ms. Krista Ryon, Dr. Scott Smith, Dr. Braden Tierney, Dr. Guy Trudel, and
Dr. Sara Zwart interpreted the data; contributed reagents, materials,
analysis tools, or data; and wrote the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Afshin Beheshti, Christopher E. Mason or Joseph Borg.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Sjaak Philipsen
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49289-8
Nature Communications|   (2024) 15:4927 
15
