REVIEW ARTICLE
OPEN
Paving the way to better understand the effects of prolonged
spaceﬂight on operational performance and its neural bases
A. C. Stahn
1,2✉, D. Bucher3, P. zu Eulenburg
4, P. Denise
5, N. Smith
6, F. Pagnini
7 and O. White
8✉
Space exploration objectives will soon move from low Earth orbit to distant destinations like Moon and Mars. The present work
provides an up-to-date roadmap that identiﬁes critical research gaps related to human behavior and performance in altered gravity
and space. The roadmap summarizes (1) key neurobehavioral challenges associated with spaceﬂight, (2) the need to consider sex as
a biological variable, (3) the use of integrative omics technologies to elucidate mechanisms underlying changes in the brain and
behavior, and (4) the importance of understanding the neural representation of gravity throughout the brain and its multisensory
processing. We then highlight the need for a variety of target-speciﬁc countermeasures, and a personalized administration
schedule as two critical strategies for mitigating potentially adverse effects of spaceﬂight on the central nervous system and
performance. We conclude with a summary of key priorities for the roadmaps of current and future space programs and stress the
importance of new collaborative strategies across agencies and researchers for fostering an integrative cross- and transdisciplinary
approach from cells, molecules to neural circuits and cognitive performance. Finally, we highlight that space research in
neurocognitive science goes beyond monitoring and mitigating risks in astronauts but could also have signiﬁcant beneﬁts for the
population on Earth.
npj Microgravity  (2023) 9:59 ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-023-00295-y
INTRODUCTION
Future exploration class space expeditions will be some of the
most difﬁcult, dangerous, and dynamic operations in the history of
mankind, ranging from Earth orbit operations to deep space
exploration. They will push the limits of human performance and
critically rely on the integrity of a range of organ systems and
functions. With the advent of longer spaceﬂight missions space
agencies have recognized the importance of better understanding
the effects of environmental, operational, and psychological
hazards during exploratory class missions on brain and behavior.
The potential damage to neural structures in response to
spaceﬂight and its behavioral implications are not well under-
stood. At the same time adverse behavioral conditions, psychiatric
disorders, and sensorimotor deﬁcits are considered some of the
most serious but also least understood risks during future long-
duration space missions. Many other spaceﬂight risks are ranked
lower or have been mitigated. In addition to the physiological
effects
of
microgravity,
the
spacecraft
setting
can
involve
exposure to multiple environmental toxicants and operational
stressors1 that all have the potential to affect neurobehavioral
performance (Fig. 1). Behavioral health and performance are
governed by an interplay between the central nervous system
(CNS), the environment and individual phenotypes that is
characterized by constantly updating and balancing genetic,
molecular, cellular, physiological and cognitive demands and
resources. The CNS, and particularly the brain, have emerged as a
pivotal area of research because of their vulnerability to various
spaceﬂight stressors. There is increasing evidence that spaceﬂight
is associated with various adaptations of the brain, including
intracranial ﬂuid shifts, gray matter changes, white matter
declines, and sensory reweighting and neural compensation2.
However, the exact changes in brain structure and function and
their meaning and mechanisms, as well as the role of mission
duration, sex, and phenotypic vulnerabilities are unknown. Like-
wise, data on the implications of brain changes relative to
behavioral and operational risks are lacking. Given that errors,
misjudgments, and accidents may have serious consequences,
and can lead to loss of expensive equipment and compromise
mission success, identifying and predicting the effects of space-
ﬂight on human performance and understanding their neural
correlates and molecular ﬁngerprints will be critical for successful
future exploration class missions3,4.
This exercise has been incepted by the Science Department of
ESA’s Human Spaceﬂight and Exploration Directorate. In 2020, ESA
released a Call for Ideas for evolution of the SciSpacE Roadmaps in
the post 2024 era. The overarching objective of the call was to
engage the European research community in reﬁning the focus
areas for the SciSpacE Human Research Roadmaps, particularly for
the post 2024 period. Following an initial screening of the
materials submitted, ESA appointed experts across Europe to set
up several working groups reﬂecting relevant organ systems and
human research areas for spaceﬂight. Each working group was
self-organized and expected to present its summary at a meeting
organized by ESA in late 2020. In 2021 preliminary reports were
published by ESA for a further community consultation and
review. Pooling the combined expertise of ESA with the scientiﬁc
community and stakeholders across Europe led to the identiﬁca-
tion of four major future roadmaps including Behavioral Health &
1Unit of Experimental Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 2Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Physiology, Berlin, Germany. 3IZN-Neurobiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
4Institute for Neuroradiology & German Center for Vertigo and Balance Disorders, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. 5Normandie Univ. UNICAEN, INSERM,
COMETE, CYCERON, Caen, France. 6Protective Security and Resilience Centre, Coventry University, Coventry, United Kingdom. 7Department of Psychology, Università Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore, Milan, Italy. 8Université de Bourgogne INSERM-U1093 Cognition, Action, and Sensorimotor Plasticity, Dijon, France. ✉email: astahn@pennmedicine.upenn.edu;
olivier.white@u-bourgogne.fr
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

Performance (including Neuroscience & Psychology), Human
Physiology, Pharmacological Countermeasures, and Integrative
Countermeasures. Leveraging the outcomes of previous similar
exercises (e.g., THESEUS) as well as opening up the knowledge-
building process to the scientiﬁc community across disciplines, it
has been possible to clearly deﬁne gaps and risks that are
currently considered highly critical but unmitigated in space
science and technology. The process of creating the roadmaps has
involved hundreds of individuals from the wider life science and
engineering communities, ESA and international partners. This
strategy allowed to maximize cross-disciplinary synergies (inter-
actions between working groups were strongly encouraged as of
the start of the project). The outcome of this work has been
summarized in a series of papers presented by each working
group. The current manuscript highlights the ESA SciSpaceE
research gaps identiﬁed in the ﬁeld of Neuroscience as part of the
Behavioral Health & Performance Roadmap; the Psychology expert
group provided additional feedback on some aspects at the
boundary between neuroscience and psychology. In the following
sections, we identify and discuss some key knowledge gaps
related to neurobehavioral performance during human future
exploration space missions. Next, we address potential counter-
measures to mitigate these risks. We conclude with a summary of
key priorities for the roadmaps of current and future space
programs, and how addressing these knowledge gaps can beneﬁt
people and industrial applications on Earth.
KEY KNOWLEDGE GAPS
Brain and behavior—which cognitive domains are affected?
There is now considerable evidence that spaceﬂight conditions
can negatively affect the brain. Koppelmans and colleagues (2016)
reported extensive volumetric gray matter decreases, including
large areas covering the temporal and frontal poles and around
the orbits in response to spaceﬂight5. The same research group
also observed white structural disruption in areas critical for visuo-
motor control and higher-order visuo-spatial processing after
spaceﬂight6. Notably, other groups reported increases in white
matter immediately after spaceﬂight that persisted seven months
after return to Earth7. Robust effects have also been observed for
ventricular volume expansions8–13, which did not return to
preﬂight levels six months9,13 and even up to one year after
landing10.
The implications of these changes on human performance and
behavior are unclear. Some of the most robust effects have been
found for postural control. Using task functional magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) Hupfeld and colleagues (2022) demon-
strated widespread reductions in cortical deactivation in somato-
sensory and visual areas after spaceﬂight that were associated
with postural changes in balance decline14. Likewise, it was also
shown that spaceﬂight-induced changes in cortical thickness of
vestibular and sensorimotor regions, including the posterior insula
and the superior temporal gyrus, predicted postural balance
performance15. The effects on cognitive performance (as com-
pared to sensorimotor control) are less clear16. While various
Ra
di
at
io
n 
   
   
   
   
   
 C
ar
bo
n 
Di
ox
id
e 
   
   
   
   
   
 S
le
ep
 &
 C
ir
ca
di
an
 
Di
sr
up
ti
on
s 
   
   
   
   
   
 H
ig
h 
W
or
kl
oa
d 
   
   
   
   
   
Is
ol
at
io
n 
& 
C
on
fi
ne
m
en
t  
   
   
   
   
   
Di
st
an
ce
 f
ro
m 
Ea
rt
h 
   
   
   
   
  
Al
te
re
d 
Gr
av
it
y 
   
   
   
  
   
   
  
Sl
ee
p 
H
yg
ie
n
e 
   
   
   
   
Se
lf
-A
d
p
at
iv
e 
Tr
ai
ni
n
g 
  
Vi
rt
ua
l 
R
ea
lit
y 
   
   
   
 F
a
m
il
y 
& 
Ps
yc
h
ol
o
gi
ca
l 
S
u
p
p
or
t  
  
   
   
  
Ar
ti
ci
al
 G
ra
vi
ty
   
   
   
   
P
hy
si
ca
l  
A
ct
iv
it
y 
   
   
   
   
 A
u
g
m
e
nt
e
d 
Fe
e
d
b
ac
k 
   
   
  
Behavior
Omics
Cells
Physiology
Performance
Molecules
Fig. 1
Integrative transdisciplinary research approach to systematically identify the crosstalk of manifestations between behavioral
systems (physiologic, cognitive, and self-report) and their neural bases (genetic, molecular, and cellular). Red circle indicates
environmental and operational stressors. Blue circle shows countermeasures to mitigate neurobehavioral risks. The countermeasures are
expected to be synergistic and need to be targeted to individual needs (individualized countermeasures). The brain that orchestrates all
processes is at the center of these concentric circles. Gray lines indicate the mutual interdependencies between omics, cells, molecules,
integrative physiology, and their neurobehavioral signatures.
A.C. Stahn et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
1234567890():,;

neurobehavioral effects have been observed in response to
speciﬁc spaceﬂight stressors (e.g., sleep deprivation, hypoxia,
hypercapnia and irradiation), most data collected during space-
ﬂight show stability, or performance increases throughout the
mission17,18. The inconclusive ﬁndings can at least somewhat be
attributed to study designs and methodological limitations such
as mission duration, the type of tasks to assess cognitive
performance, and the number and spacing of data sampling time
points. For instance, Moore and colleagues (2019) observed
signiﬁcant impairments in manual dexterity, degradation in
manual tracking, during dual tasking, and a car driving simulator
task immediately upon return from space19. Notably, the effects
recovered quickly (3–5 days post-landing), and the authors
attributed their ﬁndings to post-ﬂight blunting in low-frequency
(‘tilt’) otolith function in addition to fatigue and environmental
factors unique to prolonged stays in a spacecraft (e.g., increased
CO2 levels, altered day/night cycles, high workload, conﬁned
space)19. Such effects could have a profound impact on operator
proﬁciency such as controling a vehicle during the exploration of
novel terrains, or performing rendezvous and docking maneuvers.
It may also be possible that certain effects are delayed, and are
only detected after weeks to months. For example, the NASA Twin
Study showed that year-long human spaceﬂight does not
immediately affect cognitive performance but reveals some
adverse effects 6 months after return to Earth20. The temporal
dynamics of cognitive performance trajectories during and after
spaceﬂight are still to be explored. Along the same lines it is
unclear whether there is a dose-response relationship between
neurobehavioral adaptations and mission duration. It is therefore
critical that future studies will go beyond 6-month duration
missions, and consider following up space crews throughout the
recovery of plus one year. Previous cognitive assessments also
seem to have been driven by classical neuropsychological test
paradigms. It is possible that spaceﬂight would beneﬁt from more
complex tasks that are speciﬁcally targeted to the astronaut
population, and capture cognitive domains associated with visuo-
spatial processing that are expected to be tightly coupled with
operational tasks5,6. Moreover, it is expected that such tasks could
be relevantly affected by gravitational changes because its close
link to the vestibular system, which goes beyond maintaining gaze
and balance. Interactions between the otoliths and semicircular
canals critically contribute to spatial perception including self-
motion, orientation, and navigation. It is possible that weightless-
ness affects various visuo-spatial abilities because of reduced
gravitational stimulation. For example, it is known that spaceﬂight
causes changes various vestibular responses leading to orientation
illusions, sensory localization errors, and changes in vestibulo-
ocular reﬂexes21. Cognitive tasks involving the neurovestibular
system such as mental rotation22, perceived orientation23, and
distance judgments24 are also affected during spaceﬂight. Some
astronauts have reported a "time compression syndrome" in
orbit25. They also require more time than normal to perform
standard mental activity26,27. Previous microgravity research has
also demonstrated the effects of weightlessness on posture, gaze,
functional mobility, and spatial orientation, reporting mispercep-
tions of visual orientation, depth and distance, and difﬁculties in
shape recognition28. It is expected that any impairments in visuo-
spatial abilities will also have adverse effects on spatial navigation
performance. Given that the perception of self-motion depends
on integrating visual information with gravitational cues pro-
cessed by the vestibular system, spatial updating deﬁcits are
expected when gravity levels change. Data from parabolic ﬂights
though show that both micro- and hypergravity can lead to less
precise spatial updating, a fundamental ability underlying spatial
navigation29. This prediction is also in line with emerging evidence
highlighting the cortical projections of the vestibular system.
Given the pivotal role of visuo-spatial abilities and time
evaluation for mapping spatial relationships and operations such
as docking, landing, and exploring and navigating in new
environments and on planets with low gravity, it is imperative
to understand the impact of spaceﬂight on spatial cognition and
its neural basis. One of the key brain areas for mapping spatial
relationships and performing navigational tasks is the hippocam-
pus30. Animal data suggest that the hippocampus and related
brain structures (i.e., parahippocampal, entorhinal, and perirhinal
cortices)
could
be
particularly
vulnerable
to
the
stressors
associated with long-duration spaceﬂight such as radiation31,
increased CO2 levels32, vestibular dysfunction33, stress34, sleep
deprivation35, and isolation and conﬁnement36,37. The effects of
prolonged isolation and conﬁnement on hippocampal plasticity
have been demonstrated in humans, revealing signiﬁcant reduc-
tions in dentate gyrus volume which were associated with
reductions in key neurotrophins and adverse cognitive effects38.
It is possible that the physiological effects of microgravity,
environmental toxicants, and operational stressors interact and
aggravate the consequences on brain plasticity during long-
duration space missions.
Sex as a biological variable
It is also unclear whether neurobehavioral differences in response
to spaceﬂight are characterized by sex- and genetic-speciﬁc
adaptations. For instance, on Earth there is little doubt that spatial
navigation and its neural circuitry are characterized by sex-speciﬁc
differences [e.g.,39–41]. It is unclear whether such differences also
exist in astronauts, and if and to what extent spatial navigation
and related brain changes are differently affected after spaceﬂight
in men and women. In fact, our current understanding of
neurobiological sex differences associated with spaceﬂight is
critically limited because of the signiﬁcant disproportion of sexes
enrolled in previous astronaut corps. According to our best
knowledge there are currently no data comparing brain changes
between male and female astronauts. Elucidating the effect of sex
is mandatory to fully understand brain plasticity and behavior and
their molecular mechanisms42,43. This notion is in line with the
world’s leading research centers to consider sex as a biological
variable44, and the space agencies’ goal to increasingly strengthen
the role of women in future space expeditions. For instance, the
newest class of NASA astronaut candidates included almost 50%
women45. In 2020 astronaut Christina Koch broke the record for
the single longest spaceﬂight by a woman. With 328 days in space,
she is among the top ﬁve all-time records for the longest single
spaceﬂight. NASA also announced that the next person on Moon
and the ﬁrst person on Mars will likely be a woman46. Due to the
increasing and essential role of women in future space missions,
studies of both men and women are critically needed to better
understand sex-dependent vulnerabilities to adverse neurobeha-
vioral effects during future exploratory space expeditions such as
a mission to Mars.
Neurobiology
A central tenet of neuroscience is the cellular understanding of
nervous system functions. Although great strides in quantifying
the effects of spaceﬂight on neuronal physiology have been
made, and despite the numerous constraints of space research47,
a more synoptic understanding of the effects of altered gravity,
space radiation, and prolonged spaceﬂight on the morphology
and physiology of the various cell types of the nervous system and
their synapses will be important to the success of future long-
duration missions to the Moon or Mars. Morphological and
functional alterations at the synapse could result in physiological
impairments which fundamentally alter information processing in
the nervous system. A more comprehensive understanding of
spaceﬂight-induced physiological and structural alterations at the
synapse and synaptic active zones, as well as the resulting
changes in short and long-term plasticity and neurotransmitter
A.C. Stahn et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 

homeostasis, are just a few of the relevant topics that need to be
addressed in the years to come. These questions are not just
relevant to glutamatergic, GABAergic, and cholinergic transmis-
sion but should be investigated in all relevant neurotransmitter
systems (adenosinergic, glycinergic, histaminergic, monoaminer-
gic)
as
well
as
the
neuropeptides
and
gaseous
signaling
molecules.
Details regarding the effects of spaceﬂight on the nervous
system have been poorly described so far. Animal experiments
offer great potential to better understand the mechanisms
underlying the neuronal responses to spaceﬂight. Spaceﬂight
can signiﬁcantly affect neuronal morphology and clearance of
neuronal trash, highlighting the need to carefully assess the risks
of long-duration spaceﬂight on the nervous system. Micro- and
hypergravity responsive gene signatures identiﬁed several candi-
date targets with terrestrial roles in neuronal function and/or
cellular metabolism, which are linked to regulation by daf-16/
FOXO signaling. This could help to understand the basis of
spaceﬂight-induced maladaptation.
Given the sparse availability of samples, the use of integrative
omics technologies in multidimensional longitudinal studies to
quantify metabolites, gene expression, and DNA methylation as
well as DNA, RNA, protein, and chromatin dynamics after exposure
to long-duration spaceﬂight will be paramount for furthering
the
understanding
of
space
induced
changes
in
cellular
neurobiology20.
Internal representation of gravity
Future crewed missions to the Moon and Mars will expose
astronauts to varying levels of gravity. The neurophysiological
responses to changing hypogravity (i.e., between 0 and 1 g) and
hypergravity levels (i.e., > 1 g) are poorly understood. Gravity plays
a fundamental role in human behavior and performance by
providing critical cues to the vestibular system (see also discussion
above) and supporting the concept of verticality (which way is
“up” or “down”). The otolith organs detect linear, i.e., inertial and
gravitational, accelerations acting on our bodies48–50. In micro-
gravity, the gravitational force vector, which is predominantly
sensed via the otolith organs (saccule > utricle), no longer acts as a
sensory reference. The resulting mismatch between the vestibular,
and the visual, proprioceptive and other sensorimotor signals can
affect spatial orientation, hand-eye coordination, vertical but not
horizontal oculomotor behavior, postural control and self-motion
perception (for a comprehensive overview see Clément et al.,
2020)51.
The
earliest
symptom
for
this
sensory
mismatch
phenomenon and modulation of otolith function is the elevated
susceptibility for motion sickness during parabolic ﬂight as well as
during the ﬁrst days of exposure to microgravity and upon return
to Earth after a long-duration space mission52. This is most likely
an adaptation process associated with the altered integration and
interaction of information from the semicircular canals and the
otolith organs. It is known that spaceﬂight causes various changes
in several vestibular downstream responses including transient
core level modulations in vestibulo-ocular reﬂexes21 leading to
room tilt illusions and sensory localization errors. When tasks are
performed during or shortly after any gravitational transitions
sudden head movements especially in the yaw plane are not
advised, further highlighting the role of canal-otolith integration.
Gravitational transitions can also induce aftereffects that will
persist for some time after as the neurovestibular systems adapt to
the new gravito-inertial loading. These neurological phenomena
have been shown to impair behavior and performance across
dimensions. While many studies have demonstrated that humans
and animals eventually adapt to new gravitational environments
(mostly microgravity)53, only a few have addressed the re-
adaptation processes following re-entry: astronauts also experi-
ence a condition called “entry motion sickness”, which slows the
speed of decision making and alters their ability to control the
vehicle and their movements54. Neurovestibular challenges that
occur when the crew member returns to normal gravity include
alterations in manual control20, inability to exit the vehicle55,
postural imbalance56, and locomotion disorders57. The ﬁrst three
weeks in space and the ﬁrst two weeks back on Earth present
critical adaptation periods that are characterized by impairments
in perceptual-motor skills and higher attentional processes.
However, the dynamics of re-adaptation when transitioning back
to the original environment (e.g., 1 g) or to a new gravity level
(e.g., Moon or Mars) is not well understood. This lack of knowledge
may be partially explained by current methodological limitations
and operational constraints; it is extremely challenging to collect
data during or upon entry in a new environment or immediately
after landing. The quantiﬁcation of the dynamics of sensory
processes with a short time constant (e.g., fast motor (re-)
adaptation) requires accurate measurements immediately before
and after entry, landing, or any other event that induces
signiﬁcant changes in the environment. Consequently, current
methods of preﬂight training and post-ﬂight rehabilitation have
not been optimized to minimize the functional impacts of these
natural adaptive responses during gravitational transitions or to
restore environment-appropriate sensorimotor functions after
these transitions.
Current research suggests a multimodal representation of
gravity58, in which proprioceptive, somatosensory, visual and
vestibular signals are integrated for processing gravity-related
cues. For instance, Mittelstaedt (1996) proposed a somatic
component for graviception that is located in the trunk, and
particularly in the kidneys59. Humans use an internal model to
dissociate gravity and inertial acceleration from a composite
acceleration signal49,60. As a result of the complex integration of
graviception and its interaction with motor control, understanding
how the nervous system adapts to changes in gravity is
challenging.
The precise nature and properties of this internal multimodal
representation going beyond the vestibular system during acute
gravitational transitions are also still to be determined. Experi-
ments performed under altered gravitational levels have identiﬁed
a rapid adaptation process. At the same time the data have also
revealed biases indicative of partial habituation that could be
observed throughout the entire (often short-term) exposure to
weightlessness61–63. Early access to astronauts (immediately upon
entry or after landing) is critical to characterize the dynamics of
this highly dynamic adaptation process (see also previous section).
This point has been emphasized in a previous white paper by
White et al. (2016)3, and remains a critical issue. The next steps to
deepen our understanding of the neural bases of adaptation to
changes in gravity will require to address current methodological
constraints such as technologies to measure brain function of
cortical and sub-cortical structures in real-time. Furthermore, the
modularity of dedicated discrete sensory organs and brain regions
for processing gravity cues suggest a distributed role of structures
and functions for perception and control50. In addition to visual,
vestibular and internal (prior) information, somatosensory (pro-
prioceptive) feedback and its inﬂuence on planning and control
may serve as a calibration signal that is conditioning our
perception and the scaling of motor commands. The importance
of this sensory information has not been fully acknowledged so
far. Finally, the experimental context itself faces several metho-
dological challenges. Structural and functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) of the brain cannot be used to acquire data
during gravity transitions. Data collected before and after an
interventions (e.g., parabolic ﬂight or centrifugation) can probe
neural adaptations in response to acute exposures to altered
gravitational levels. Yet, they must be cautiously interpreted
because they do not allow to draw any conclusions about the
effects of gravity levels and transitions. Although there is solid
A.C. Stahn et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

evidence of the existence of a vestibular network that processes
gravity signals50,64, current approaches are insufﬁcient to draw
clear-cut conclusions, ﬁrstly for methodological reasons, and
secondly because gravity in essence inﬂuences all systems at
the same time. Technologies to observe brain function such as
electroencephalography (EEG) and functional near-infrared spec-
troscopy (fNIRS) are mobile and could potentially be used to
capture cortical neurophysiological changes in response to altered
gravity in real-time. EEG records electrocortical activity at the scalp
surface with temporal resolution and moderate spatial resolution
(recent systems can support a density of 256 electrodes improving
the accuracy of source localization techniques). In contrast, (f)NIRS
reﬂects
brain
activation
by
measuring
brain
hemodynamic
responses at lower temporal but higher spatial resolutions.
Combining EEG and fNIRS may therefore overcome some of the
previous methodological challenges and open new avenues to
pinpoint how the brain creates an internal representation of
gravity65,66. However, such approaches require cautious validation
studies because of the potential confounding associated with
cephalic ﬂuid shifts on functional brain recordings67.
NEUROBEHAVIORAL COUNTERMEASURES
Given the variety of environmental and psychological stressors
associated with prolonged exploratory class missions, a combina-
tion of different treatments and interventions will be needed to
mitigate neurobehavioral risks, maximize performance, and ensure
astronaut health and safety, and mission success. Considering that
responses to different spaceﬂight stressors are expected to vary
between
astronauts
and
their
phenotypic
differences,
the
strategies
for
neurobehavioral
risk
mitigation
need
to
be
personalized in terms of type, frequency, and intensity throughout
a space mission. We here summarize some of the current and
future approaches to maintaining neurobehavioral health and
performance.
Artiﬁcial gravity—a holistic approach that could also beneﬁt
brain and behavior?
Long-duration stay in microgravity on the various space stations
demonstrated how gravity, or the lack thereof, has a signiﬁcant
impact on all organ systems such as bone decalciﬁcation, muscle
loss, cardiovascular deconditioning, orthostatic intolerance, visual
impairment, suppression of the immune system and other
changes indicative of premature aging. Previous countermeasures
to mitigate the effects of weightlessness have addressed different
organ systems using target-speciﬁc approaches, i.e., lower body
negative pressure68 and ﬂuid loading to reduce orthostatic
intolerance; resistive exercise and nutritional interventions to
minimize muscle and bone loss; or aerobic exercise to maintain
cardiorespiratory ﬁtness69.
Delivering Earth-like gravity levels using artiﬁcial gravity (AG)
could provide a holistic approach by mitigating physiological risks
associated with prolonged exposure to weightlessness across all
organ systems70. The idea of using AG to compensate for the
negative effects of weightlessness is as old as spaceﬂight itself and
has been considered a standard against which other counter-
measures should be measured71. A large, ground-based, rotating
platform that could house human subjects for long periods (weeks
to months) while exposing them 24/7 to higher-than-normal
gravity levels would offer a unique means to validate the long-
term beneﬁcial effects of small hypergravity on the human body
across all organ systems72. Whereas the idea of generating AG by
means of rotating parts of a spacecraft is compelling, rotation can
have a number of undesirable side effects on performance73. For
example, consider the Orion spacecraft which is about 5 m in
diameter. To generate a force of about 1 g in a circular space with
a 2.5-m radius, a rotation rate of 20 rpm would be required to
generate a force of about 1 g. Depending on the location relative
to the center of rotation body weight (gravitational gradients)
changes. Likewise, walking in the direction of rotation will increase
the centripetal force, and hence AG, and therefore also increase
body weight73. In addition, such rotation speeds create signiﬁcant
Coriolis forces generated by body movements. To systematically
study such effects DiZio and Lackner established a unique rotating
chamber at the Ashton Graybiel Spatial Orientation Laboratory.
This research resulted in a series of seminal studies on how lateral
Coriolis forces can disrupt body movements and object transport
and manipulation, how reaching errors carry-over in the opposite
direction when the rotation stops, and that the human body can
adapt to the Coriolis force and compensate the perturbations very
rapidly73.
However, data on the long-term beneﬁts of prolonged use of
rotating chambers on the human body are lacking. In addition, the
design and technical implementation of AG using rotating
chambers in spacecrafts remains a considerable challenge. In
contrast to the continuous rotation of a spacecraft to mimic
Earth’s gravity, an efﬁcient comprise could be the use of a short-
arm radius centrifuge74. Exposing crewmembers to AG of 1 to 2 g
at the heart for 0.5 to 2 h has been shown to be a promising
countermeasure for reducing the effects on body unloading and
ﬂuid shifts75. AG has been shown to mitigate cardiovascular
deconditioning74,76–79;
muscle
and
bone
loss80–82;
improve
neuromotor reﬂex function83; decrease headache severity asso-
ciated with head-down tilt bedrest84; and alleviate some of the
conditions of the spaceﬂight associated Neuro-Ocular Syndrome
(SANS)75. AG also provides critical cues to the vestibular system.
This is important because the vestibular system goes beyond
maintaining gaze and postural stabilization. There is increasing
evidence indicating that the vestibular system plays a critical role
in brain plasticity and cognitive performance such as learning and
memory formation33. For instance, patients with bilateral vestib-
ular loss exhibited bilateral atrophy of the hippocampus of nearly
20%, which was correlated with spatial memory deﬁcits in a virtual
Morris water maze task85. The manipulation of the vestibular
system has been shown to impair ﬁring patterns of head direction
cells (which are located in various brain areas including the
subiculum, thalamus, and retrosplenial cortex86), hippocampal
function, and medial entorhinal cortex87–89. Together these data
highlight that vestibular stimulation provides critical cues for brain
health and cognitive performance, supporting the notion that AG
as a countermeasure could go beyond the musculoskeletal and
cardiovascular system and also beneﬁt brain and behavioral
health. In addition, recent cell experiments suggest that hyper-
gravity can have profound beneﬁcial effects on neuronal health
that are independent of vestibular stimulation. For instance,
Lichterfeld et al. (2022) recently showed that hypergravity
attenuates astrocytic reactivity, which is critical to limiting severe
astrogliosis and the formation of the glial scar90. Likewise,
exposure
of
murine
primary
hippocampal
neurons
to
2 g
hypergravity increased neurite number by 30% and neurite
projection length by 20%. In addition, mature synaptic contacts
were formed under hypergravity conditions in neurons of later
developmental
stages91.
These
data
provide
evidence
that
hypergravity ameliorates neuronal cell growth and synaptic
plasticity in vivo. Whether the effects of hypergravity on the
cellular level also translate to humans is unclear.
Recent advances by space agencies are attempting to unravel
the effects of AG on all organ systems including brain and
behavior and to identify the most efﬁcient protocols for using AG
as a countermeasure. For instance, the NASA/ESA AGBRESA bed
rest study carried out at DLR in 2019/2020 aimed to compare
intermittent vs continuous AG exposures. Currently, ESA is
carrying out two long-term bed rest studies investigating the
effects of AG with different types of physical exercise. Speciﬁcally,
the concept involves a hybrid approach of AG and physical
A.C. Stahn et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 

exercise, i.e., exposing subjects to physical exercise while they are
being centrifuged. Given the beneﬁts of exercise across all organ
systems, it is hypothesized that AG combined with physical
exercise will interact in synergistically. With respect to the
mitigation of neurobehavioral risks, it is noteworthy that physical
exercise is also a potent stimulus for structural and functional
brain plasticity92. Animal studies demonstrate that voluntary
running increases synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis in the
hippocampus93. The causal link between physical activity and
hippocampal plasticity and cognitive beneﬁts such as spatial
memory performance has also been reported in a number of
human studies94–96. The selective effects of AG and exercise on
the brain suggest that the integrative approach of AG combined
with exercise could go beyond affecting the cardiovascular and
musculoskeletal system and also mitigate neurobehavioral risks
associated with long-duration spaceﬂight in a highly efﬁcient
manner. While the hybrid approach of combining AG with
physical exercise is promising it remains to be determined
whether the beneﬁts will go beyond exercise (or AG) per se and
whether future crew vehicles will allow supporting the space and
infrastructure of SAHC.
Operational performance
Future long-duration space expeditions will be among the most
difﬁcult, dangerous and complex operations in history. Astronauts
will be required to stay physically and socially isolated in conﬁned
spaces for 30 months, and longer. It is expected that not all skills
and knowledge required for these missions can be retained and
retrieved based on pre-mission training alone. Limited and
delayed communication will signiﬁcantly constrain support from
Mission Control and crews will increasingly rely on autonomous
onboard technologies to successfully perform rendezvous man-
euvers, and telerobotic operations post-landing. Augmented
feedback and autonomous self-adaptative, just-in-time training
of spaceﬂight-relevant tasks may help to maintain operational
performance.
Autonomous self-adaptative, just-in-time sensorimotor
training
Adaptive, just-in-time training relevant to these speciﬁc require-
ments could address this need by delivering tasks that adjust the
difﬁculty level to the individual astronaut’s knowledge and skill
learning curve. To mitigate this risk, research needs to identify the
neural bases of key operational tasks, and design neuroscience-
based adaptive visuomotor training programs that can be ﬂexibly
adapted to speciﬁc mission requirements and crew demands.
These approaches should be characterized by (1) consolidating
and improving sensorimotor skills relevant for inﬂight and post-
landing operational tasks; (2) featuring an autonomous and
adaptive training approach that does not rely on feedback from
ﬂight operations on ground; (3) maximizing the transfer of
mission-relevant motor skills; (4) allowing the assessment of the
neural circuitry underlying the task; and (5) delivering the training
in a motivating and meaningful way to astronauts.
Augmented feedback
How can human motor skills for operating human-machine
interfaces such as controlers be maintained when gravitational
levels change? Can ﬁne skills be supported by manipulating
vestibular and visual cues and controlling somatosensory and
haptic information? Does the use of 1g-dynamics at the human/
machine interface during altered gravity promote skill acquistion?
Or would such feedback even impair learning and adaptation
processes due to conﬂicting sensory information? Addressing
these questions is complex because graviception and the internal
representation of gravity is an integrative multimodal process. The
basic rationale for using augmented feedback to maintain
operational performance is that the central nervous system
masters the motor control of complex tasks in 1 g. Delivering
controler dynamics mimicking 1 g levels and/or providing haptic
feedback could be expected to speed up learning and maintaining
operational tasks. A few studies tested whether the simulation of a
local terrestrial gravity (1 g) applied at the level of the hand
improves pointing performance during altered gravity (0 g and
1.8 g)97,98. The data of this work are promising, showing pointing
performance improvements and supporting the idea to design
human-machine interfaces leveraging haptic feedback98. The
effects of a simulation of weightlessness (0 g) and hypergravity
(1.8 g) on the same task parameters have also been investigated
on ground (i.e., 1 g). Remarkably, the simulation of gravitational
ﬁelds different from 1 g applied locally to the effector produced
effects that were comparable to immersion in an altered
gravitational ﬁeld99. These data demonstrate that the application
of simple focal forces is sufﬁcient to reproduce the effects of
gravitational changes on relevant task parameters. In other words,
more complex systems that simulate distributed force ﬁelds on
the body, e.g., the upper arm, are not necessary. Together, the
results underline the importance of the proprioceptive signals for
the encoding of gravity, and also call for future research to better
understand these effects with potential applications in robotic
rehabilitation.
Finally, noise, like gravity, is also omnipresent in any environ-
ment and cannot be completed removed in the chain of
physiological signal processing. Counter-intuitively, noise—or
uncertainty in sensory signals—can be beneﬁcial in some
conditions. Stochastic resonance is a mechanism whereby a
particular level of noise enhances the response of nonlinear
systems to weak sensory signals. The effects of stochastic
resonance on sensory modalities and, more particularly on
somatosensory information have been demonstrated, paving the
way toward its potential for improving sensorimotor performance
as well as cognitive and autonomic functions100. These promising
results demonstrate that stochastic resonance represents a ﬂexible
and non-invasive technique that can be applied to a variety of
scenarios beyond astronauts, including in ambulant elderly, skilled
movements,
sports,
and
to
patients
with
sensorimotor
or
autonomic dysfunctions101.
Future research on the use of self-adaptive, automous opera-
tional training and augmented feedback will help to better
understand the fundamentals of ﬁne motor skill acquisition and
adaptation, and provide insightful information on the optimal
design and control of human-machine interfaces and wearable
robots in space environments and other immersive dynamics.
Individualized countermeasures
The variety and speciﬁcity of neurobehavioral hazards and risks
associated with spaceﬂight highlight the need for a combination
of different approaches and methodologies to mitigate environ-
mental and psychological stressors associated with prolonged
space
missions.
These
interventions
comprise
a
range
of
methodologies, technologies, and approaches such as: self-
adaptive training systems and augmented feedback to maintain
operational
performance;
exercise
and
relaxation
programs;
schedules supporting sleep hygiene and maintaining regular
work/rest cycles; engaging in meaningful work and learning; food,
plant growth, VR sensory stimulation and entertainment; team
building; family support; psychological counseling; balancing
social and personal space; and habitat characteristics promoting
health and well-being. Like personalized medicine, the adminis-
tration of these measures should be based on the crewmembers’
individual needs instead of facilitating a single “one ﬁts all”
strategy applied to every crew member. Furthermore, the
combination and prioritization of countermeasures should also
A.C. Stahn et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

be considered a dynamic process that varies within individuals
and across time. In other words, the relative importance of speciﬁc
strategies will vary during the course of a mission, requiring a
constant reevaluation of the crewmembers’ individual needs.
Stahn & Kühn (2021) referred to this concept as “Individualized
Countermeasures” (ICount), which deﬁnes countermeasures as a
dynamic construct that is optimized relative to the individual
requirements as a function of mission duration. It requires the
development of a systematic “toolbox” that combines a multi-
plicity of methodologies and approaches that can be ﬂexibly
utilized to meet crews’ individual needs102. The variety of
approaches, the consideration of phenotypic differences, and
the dynamic nature of individual preferences for speciﬁc needs
during long-duration expeditions will be critical to maximize the
beneﬁts and synergies of neurobehavioral countermeasures.
PRIORITIES FOR THE SPACE PROGRAM (MICROGRAVITY AND/
OR EXPLORATION RELEVANCE)
An integrative framework from omics to behavior
Future long-duration space missions will be considerably longer
than current 6-month missions on ISS. Mitigating cognitive and
behavioral risks during such missions is a high priority for
successful mission completion requiring several strategies that
are summarized in Box 1. First, to address this gap research should
target an integrative approach combining state-of-the-art immu-
nological, neuroendrinological, behavioral, and imaging technol-
ogies that go beyond current experiments on ISS and spaceﬂight
analogs. Multi-model neuroimaging approaches, including func-
tional imaging to identify differences in brain networks and their
connectivities, high-resolution structural imaging allowing to
segment tiny, but critical subcortical brain areas such as the
hippocampus with precision, and techniques to examine the role
of the cortical circuitry associated with critical mission tasks
control will play an important role to fully understand brain
changes in response to spaceﬂight. This approach needs to go
beyond standard clinical brain imaging but use novel imaging
techniques such as multi-parameter mapping and include task
functional MRI sequences that have high operational relevance,
i.e., comprise tasks that allow to quantify the neural signatures of
operational tasks such as docking and rendezvous maneuvers. In
addition to leveraging operational performance tasks, cognitive
testing should go beyond classical standard paradigms and
neuropsychological test batteries. Future work should consider
innovative tasks using a hypothesis-driven approach that is
speciﬁcally targeted at the astronaut population relative to task
type, difﬁculty, and duration. To account for effects related to the
pathways between the vestibular signal processing, the limbic
system and cortex imaging and behavioral measures should be
linked to data from postural and functional mobility tests,
videonystagmography, and vestibular evoked myogenic poten-
tials. Given the importance of mood, sleep and circadian rhythms
on cognitive function, they need to be considered as potential
moderators
of
neurobehavioral
performance.
Exploring
the
relationships between neurobehavioral data and ocular examina-
tions such as visual acuity, intraocular pressure, retinal nerve ﬁber
layer thickness, and peripapillary and macular retinal thicknesses
will allow corroborating the role of any visual impairments in
response to spaceﬂight on cognitive performance. Key neuro-
trophins, oxidative stress markers, and neuroprotective cytokines
are critical for brain health and behavior and have been shown to
be modulated by physical (in)activity and spaceﬂight stressors.
Biochemical assessments and advances in multi-omics technolo-
gies such as genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabo-
lomics can therefore help to close knowledge gaps of the
underlying molecular mechanisms and genetic drivers of neuro-
behavioral adaptations. Understanding the effect of sex and other
phenotypic differences on sensorimotor and neurobehavioral
changes is imperative because women will play an increasingly
important role in future space missions. The overall approach
should leverage the National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH)
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) heuristic framework to integrate
various
levels
of
information
from
omics
(e.g.,
genomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics), cells, and molecular
signatures to integrative physiology, neuroimaging, cognitive
tests, and self-report. Such an integrative framework will allow
us to better understand the basic neurophysiological dimensions
of functioning underlying the full range of human behavior from
normal to abnormal that relate to individual and interpersonal
adaptation and vulnerability during long-duration spaceﬂight, and
promote the
development of
effective,
target-speciﬁc, and
individualized countermeasures (Fig. 1). This line of research will
build on current gaps in the present knowledge of this topic by
delivering novel and unique data on behavioral, sensorimotor, and
operational performance outcomes, and their neural basis. To this
aim, the knowledge, technologies, and tools derived from such
data relevantly contribute to the space agencies’ goal to provide
knowledge, technologies, and tools to enable safe, reliable, and
productive human space exploration. This will support mission
planners and system developers with strategies for monitoring
and mitigating crew health and performance threats that are
currently unaddressed and considered high risks during future
exploratory space missions.
Together, the combination of various levels of knowledge,
methodologies, and outcomes highlighted here could provide the
basis to better understand and characterize the type, extent,
cause, and mechanisms of neurobehavioral changes in response
to spaceﬂight and their phenotypic signatures. The complexity,
expertise, effort, and costs cannot be leveraged by a single
experiment. However, the way spaceﬂight and spaceﬂight analog
studies are typically conceptualized has already the potential to
address such a framework. Space agencies solicit announcements
of opportunities to propose speciﬁc experiments. Following peer-
review, feasibility assessment, and a deﬁnition phase, a ﬁnal
protocol integrates several experiments that typically address a
range of physiological and behavioral research questions, includ-
ing but not limited to cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, vestibular,
immunological, and neurobehavioral outcomes. It is intriguing
that researchers and agencies could leverage the integrative
nature of such platforms and projects. Such an approach goes
Box 1 Summary of key recommendations for mitigating
operational performance deﬁcits during exploration class
missions
●
Promote an integrative research framework that allows to collect data
across neural and behavioral dimensions that maximize the understanding
of cognitive and operational performance
●
Understand sex as a biological variable: include the number of female
astronauts being studied
●
Better understand the internal representation of gravity, and its role in
maintaining visuo-spatial abilities during changing gravity conditions
●
Investigate the effects of spaceﬂight on spatial cognition and its neural basis
●
Establish brain imaging that goes beyond the identiﬁcation of clinical
manifestations,
e.g., task functional MRI sequences
that have high
operational relevance and allow to quantify the neural basis of cognitive
impairments, and predict future performance in navigation tasks, docking
maneuvers, and other spaceﬂight-relevant behavioral measures.
●
Develop cognitive tasks using a hypothesis-driven approach that are
speciﬁcally targeted at the astronaut population and expected to be
particularly vulnerable to spaceﬂight
●
Enhance unobtrusive monitoring technologies to foster integrative data
collection across neural and behavioral dimensions
●
Consider artiﬁcial gravity and individualized countermeasures as corner-
stones for mitigating human spaceﬂight risks
●
Promote data sharing and collaboration at all levels between researchers
and agencies to leverage and maximize integrative research approach
across disciplines
A.C. Stahn et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 

beyond data use agreements between experiments but starts with
the identiﬁcation of deliverables using a hypothesis-driven
rationale that promotes a holistic understanding of intellectual
frameworks that together exceed the individual disciplinary
perspectives.
Data sharing and international collaboration
To efﬁciently leverage such integrative approaches national and
international
collaborations
between
researchers
and
space
agencies will be increasingly critical103. Overarching aspects
linking to all scientiﬁc disciplines are clear. The inaccessibility of
operational
performance
data
to
the
scientiﬁc
community
complicates the study of the relationships between physiological
changes and potential performance deﬁcits (e.g., piloting perfor-
mance, emergency egress, manual control, etc.) during critical
mission phases. Protocols should be established for the disclosure
of operational performance data to qualiﬁed researchers. Promot-
ing closer partnerships among the scientiﬁc, operations, and
training communities could be an efﬁcient step to pave this way.
Furthermore, the development of a data repository archiving past
experimental data sets and information on their contexts could be
very valuable to enhance the usability of previous data (e.g.,
challenge the low-N problem in space research).
BENEFIT FOR EARTH AND INDUSTRIAL RELEVANCE
Understanding how the brain adapts to spaceﬂight and processes
gravitational information to shape actions is a fundamental yet
challenging question. Every step toward this ambitious objective
will open new doors to unexplored arenas, all of which with the
potential to bring innovation transferrable to terrestrial applica-
tions. Mobile miniaturized monitoring technologies developed for
spaceﬂight could foster the unobtrusive collection of neurophy-
siological data to detect adverse neurobehavioral outcomes at an
early stage, and potentially avoid clinical manifestations in
response to environmental conditions, psychological stressors,
and unhealthy life-styles. Spaceﬂight analogs provide unique
settings that promote novel insights into brain and behavioral
plasticity on Earth104. Bed rest or dry immersion can be considered
models of aging. Likewise, isolation studies can serve as models of
social distancing
associated
with
pandemics.
Changes that
typically evolve over years can be mimicked in time-lapse,
providing unique opportunities to explore aging-related diseases
and their prevention. In addition, the high standardization and
control of these studies (e.g., nutrition, sleep/wake cycles, and
social activities) could promote the understanding of causal
relationships between inactivity, brain function, and cognitive
alterations. Collectively, these characteristics can translate the
knowledge gained from these studies to the prevention and
treatment of various clinical conditions associated with cognitive
impairments, for which reduced physical activity levels are a
critical risk factor such as chronic heart failure, Type II diabetes,
obesity, myotonic dystrophy, ﬁbromyalgia, various types of cancer,
depression, anxiety, and dementia.
In addition to better understanding such phenomena and their
mechanisms spaceﬂight research can also boost innovative and
efﬁcient technologies for monitoring and predicting adverse
neurobehavioral conditions, and promote the development of
innovative treatment strategies105. Technologies such as augmen-
ted feedback and virtual reality—also in combination with
physical exercise—can help patients to accelerate recovery or
serve as a training tool for promoting brain health106. Given the
fundamental role of gravity on the human body the use of artiﬁcial
gravity may open new avenues for promoting health and disease.
In addition to short bouts of artiﬁcial gravity induces by short-arm
human centrifuges, large rotating habitats that can house subjects
for days could serve to better understand the effects of artiﬁcial
gravity on the human organism, and potentially probe new
interventions for modern epidemic health issues such as obesity,
osteoporosis, sarcopenia, and cardiovascular deconditioning.
FUTURE OUTLOOK AND SUMMARY
As space-faring nations across the globe are fueling a new race of
human space exploration that goes well beyond the Moon,
national agencies and private entities across the globe have
accelerated the research and development that will promote the
safety and success of such missions. These missions will be some
of the most difﬁcult, dangerous, and dynamic operations in
history, and considerably longer than current standard missions
on ISS. Under current and notional NASA plans, crewed orbital
missions to Mars could exceed 1,000 days, and exploration
campaigns could even span decades. Such prolonged mission
durations could introduce potential unprecedented astronauts’
health and performance risks. Adverse behavioral conditions and
psychiatric disorders are considered one of the most serious but
also least understood risks during such long-duration space
missions. The effects of extreme environmental conditions and
psychological stressors on brain and behavior are currently not
fully understood. Future work in this ﬁeld should be characterized
by an interdisciplinary approach that promotes collaborations
across space agencies, considers sex as a biological variable, and
integrates multimodal brain imaging, psychological and beha-
vioral, neurovestibular, cardiovascular, omics, sleep, and circadian
data. Such an approach could promote a holistic understanding of
intellectual frameworks that together exceed individual disciplin-
ary perspectives. The knowledge from such approaches could go
beyond their application to spaceﬂight and translate to the
prevention and treatment of various clinical conditions on Earth
including but not limited to neurogenerative diseases.
Received: 20 September 2022; Accepted: 15 June 2023;
REFERENCES
1. Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental biological features of spaceﬂight: advancing
the ﬁeld to enable deep-space exploration. Cell 183, 1162–1184 (2020).
2. Hupfeld, K. E., McGregor, H. R., Reuter-Lorenz, P. A. & Seidler, R. D. Microgravity
effects on the human brain and behavior: Dysfunction and adaptive plasticity.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 122, 176–189 (2021).
3. White, O. et al. Towards human exploration of space: the THESEUS review series
on neurophysiology research priorities. Npj Microgravity 2, 16023 (2016).
4. Seidler, R. D. et al. Future research directions to identify risks and mitigation
strategies for neurostructural, ocular, and behavioral changes induced by
human spaceﬂight: A NASA-ESA expert group consensus report. Front. Neural
Circuits 16, 876789 (2022).
5. Koppelmans, V., Bloomberg, J. J., Mulavara, A. P. & Seidler, R. D. Brain structural
plasticity with spaceﬂight. NPJ Microgravity 2, 2 (2016).
6. Lee, J. K. et al. Spaceﬂight-associated brain white matter microstructural chan-
ges and intracranial ﬂuid redistribution. JAMA Neurol. 76, 412 (2019).
7. Jillings, S. et al. Macro- and microstructural changes in cosmonauts’ brains after
long-duration spaceﬂight. Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz9488 (2020).
8. Barisano, G. et al. The effect of prolonged spaceﬂight on cerebrospinal ﬂuid and
perivascular spaces of astronauts and cosmonauts. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119,
e2120439119 (2022).
9. Hupfeld, K. E. et al. The Impact of 6 and 12 months in space on human brain
structure and intracranial ﬂuid shifts. Cereb. Cortex Commun. 1, 1–15 (2020).
10. Kramer, L. A. et al. Intracranial effects of microgravity: a prospective longitudinal
MRI study. Radiology 191413 https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020191413 (2020).
11. Roberts, D. R. et al. Effects of Spaceﬂight on Astronaut Brain Structure as Indi-
cated on MRI. N. Engl. J. Med. 377, 1746–1753 (2017).
12. Roberts, D. R. et al. Prolonged microgravity affects human brain structure and
function. Am. J. Neuroradiol. 40, 1878–1885 (2019).
13. Van Ombergen, A. et al. Brain ventricular volume changes induced by long-
duration spaceﬂight. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 10531–10536 (2019).
A.C. Stahn et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

14. Hupfeld, K. E. et al. Brain and behavioral evidence for reweighting of vestibular
inputs with long-duration spaceﬂight. Cereb. Cortex 32, 755–769 (2022).
15. Koppelmans, V. et al. Cortical thickness of primary motor and vestibular brain
regions predicts recovery from fall and balance directly after spaceﬂight. Brain
Struct. Funct. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-022-02492-z (2022)
16. Strangman, G. E., Sipes, W. & Beven, G. Human cognitive performance in space-
ﬂight and analogue environments. Aviat. Space Environ. Med. 85, 1033–1048 (2014).
17. Jones, C. W., Basner, M., Mollicone, D. J., Mott, C. M. & Dinges, D. F. Sleep
deﬁciency in spaceﬂight is associated with degraded neurobehavioral functions
and elevated stress in astronauts on six-month missions aboard the Interna-
tional Space Station. Sleep 45, zsac006 (2022).
18. Tays, G. D. et al. The effects of long duration spaceﬂight on sensorimotor control
and cognition. Front. Neural Circuits 15, 723504 (2021).
19. Moore, S. T. et al. Long-duration spaceﬂight adversely affects post-landing
operator proﬁciency. Sci. Rep. 9, 2677 (2019).
20. Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: a multidimensional analysis
of a year-long human spaceﬂight. Science 364, 127–128 (2019).
21. Clément, G & Reschke, M. F. Space neuroscience: what is it?. Neuroscience in
Space. (Springer: New York, 2018) 1–32.
22. Leone, G. The effect of gravity on human recognition of disoriented objects.
Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 28, 203–214 (1998).
23. Dyde, R. T., Jenkin, M. R., Jenkin, H. L., Zacher, J. E. & Harris, L. R. The effect of altered
gravity states on the perception of orientation. Exp. Brain Res. 194, 647–660 (2009).
24. Clément, G., Skinner, A. & Lathan, C. Distance and size perception in astronauts
during long-duration spaceﬂight. Life Basel Switz. 3, 524–537 (2013).
25. Albery, W. & Repperger, D. Time and mass perception in non-terrestrial envir-
onments. Acta Astronaut. 26, 119–126 (1992).
26. Manzey, D. & Lorenz, B. Mental performance during short-term and long-term
spaceﬂight. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 28, 215–221 (1998).
27. Casler, J. G. & Cook, J. R. Cognitive performance in space and analogous
environments. Int. J. Cogn. Ergon. 3, 351–372 (1999).
28. Young, L. R., Oman, C. M., Watt, D. G., Money, K. E. & Lichtenberg, B. K. Spatial
orientation in weightlessness and readaptation to earth’s gravity. Science 225,
205–208 (1984).
29. Stahn, A. C. et al. Spatial updating depends on gravity. Front. Neural Circuits 14,
20 (2020).
30. Hartley, T., Lever, C., Burgess, N. & O’Keefe, J. Space in the brain: how the
hippocampal formation supports spatial cognition. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol. Sci. 369, 20120510 (2014).
31. Parihar, V. K. et al. What happens to your brain on the way to Mars. Sci. Adv. 1,
e1400256 (2015).
32. Kiray, M. et al. Effects of carbon dioxide exposure on early brain development in
rats. Biotech. Histochem. 89, 371–383 (2014).
33. Smith, P. F. The vestibular system and cognition. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 30, 84–89
(2017).
34. Fa, M. et al. Stress modulation of hippocampal activity–spotlight on the dentate
gyrus. Neurobiol. Learn Mem. 112, 53–60 (2014).
35. Raven, F., Meerlo, P., Van der Zee, E. A., Abel, T. & Havekes, R. A brief period of
sleep deprivation causes spine loss in the dentate gyrus of mice. Neurobiol.
Learn. Mem. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nlm.2018.03.018 (2019).
36. Kamal, A., Ramakers, G. M. J., Altinbilek, B. & Kas, M. J. H. Social isolation stress
reduces hippocampal long-term potentiation: effect of animal strain and
involvement of glucocorticoid receptors. Neuroscience 256, 262–270 (2014).
37. Cinini, S. M. et al. Social isolation disrupts hippocampal neurogenesis in young
non-human primates. Front. Neurosci. 8, 45 (2014).
38. Stahn, A. C. et al. Brain changes in response to long Antarctic expeditions. N.
Engl. J. Med. 381, 2273–2275 (2019).
39. Padilla, L. M., Creem-Regehr, S. H., Stefanucci, J. K. & Cashdan, E. A. Sex differ-
ences in virtual navigation inﬂuenced by scale and navigation experience.
Psychon. Bull. Rev. 24, 582–590 (2017).
40. Schinazi, V. R., Nardi, D., Newcombe, N. S., Shipley, T. F. & Epstein, R. A. Hip-
pocampal size predicts rapid learning of a cognitive map in humans. Hippo-
campus https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.22111 (2013).
41. Gron, G., Wunderlich, A. P., Spitzer, M., Tomczak, R. & Riepe, M. W. Brain acti-
vation during human navigation: gender-different neural networks as substrate
of performance. Nat. Neurosci. 3, 404–408 (2000).
42. Cahill, L. Why sex matters for neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 7, 477–484 (2006).
43. Cahill, L. Equal not equal the same: sex differences in the human brain. Cere-
brum 2014, 5 (2014).
44. Clayton, J. A. Applying the new SABV (sex as a biological variable) policy to
research and clinical care. Physiol. Behav. 187, 2–5 (2018).
45. Mars, K. & Bunbar, B. NASA astronaut candidates. https://www.nasa.gov/
astronauts/biographies/candidates (2018).
46. Maxouris, C. NASA head says ﬁrst person on Mars is ‘likely to be a woman’.
Preprint at (2019).
47. Roy-O’Reilly, M., Mulavara, A. & Williams, T. A review of alterations to the brain
during spaceﬂight and the potential relevance to crew in long-duration space
exploration. Npj Microgravity 7, 1–9 (2021).
48. Laurens, J., Meng, H. & Angelaki, D. E. Computation of linear acceleration
through an internal model in the macaque cerebellum. Nat. Neurosci. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn.3530 (2013).
49. Merfeld, D. M., Zupan, L. & Peterka, R. J. Humans use internal models to estimate
gravity and linear acceleration. Nature 30:84–89 (2017).
50. Mackrous, I., Carriot, J., Jamali, M. & Cullen, K. E. Cerebellar prediction of the
dynamic sensory consequences of gravity. Curr. Biol. CB 29, 2698–2710.e4
(2019).
51. Clément, G. R. et al. Challenges to the central nervous system during human
spaceﬂight missions to Mars. J. Neurophysiol. 123, 2037–2063 (2020).
52. Reschke, M. F., Good, E. F. & Clément, G. R. Neurovestibular symptoms in
astronauts immediately after space shuttle and international space station
missions. OTO Open 1, 2473974X17738767 (2017).
53. Goswami, N. et al. Human physiology adaptation to altered gravity environ-
ments. Acta Astronaut. 189, 216–221 (2021).
54. Ortega, H. J. & Harm, D. L. Space and entry motion sickness. in principles of
clinical medicine for space ﬂight (eds. Barratt, M. R. & Pool, S. L.) 211–222
(Springer, 2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-68164-1_10.
55. Reschke, M. F. & Clément, G. Verbal reports of neurovestibular symptoms in
astronauts after short-duration space ﬂight. Acta Astronaut. 152, 229–234
(2018).
56. Wood, S. J., Paloski, W. H. & Clark, J. B. Assessing sensorimotor function following
ISS with computerized dynamic posturography. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 86,
A45–A53 (2015).
57. Mulavara, A. P. et al. Physiological and functional alterations after spaceﬂight
and bed rest. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 50, 1961–1980 (2018).
58. Carriot, J., Mackrous, I. & Cullen, K. E. Challenges to the vestibular system in
space: how the brain responds and adapts to microgravity. Front. Neural Circuits
15, 760313 (2021).
59. Mittelstaedt, H. Somatic graviception. Biol. Psychol. 42, 53–74 (1996).
60. Mcintyre, J., Zago, M., Berthoz, A. & Lacquaniti, F. Does the brain model New-
ton’s laws? Nat. Neurosci. 4, 693–694 (2001).
61. Hermsdörfer, J. et al. Grip forces exerted against stationary held objects during
gravity changes. Exp. Brain Res. 126, 205–214 (1999).
62. White, O. et al. Altered gravity highlights central pattern generator mechanisms.
J. Neurophysiol. 100, 2819–2824 (2008).
63. Augurelle, A.-S., Penta, M., White, O. & Thonnard, J.-L. The effects of a change in
gravity on the dynamics of prehension. Exp. Brain Res. 148, 533–540 (2003).
64. Lacquaniti, F. et al. Visual gravitational motion and the vestibular system in
humans.
Front.
Integr.
Neurosci.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2013.00101
(2013).
65. Brümmer, V. et al. Coherence between brain cortical function and neurocog-
nitive performance during changed gravity conditions. J. Vis. Exp. https://
doi.org/10.3791/2670 (2011).
66. Schneider, S. et al. Changes in cerebral oxygenation during parabolic ﬂight. Eur.
J. Appl Physiol. 113, 1617–1623 (2013).
67. Brauns, K., Friedl-Werner, A., Maggioni, M. A., Gunga, H. C. & Stahn, A. C. Head-
Down Tilt Position but Not the Duration of Bed Rest Affects Resting State
Electrocortical Activity. Front. Physiol. 12, 638669 (2021).
68. Goswami, N., Blaber, A. P., Hinghofer-Szalkay, H. & Convertino, V. A. Lower body
negative pressure: physiological effects, applications, and implementation.
Physiol. Rev. 99, 807–851 (2019).
69. Clément, G. International roadmap for artiﬁcial gravity research. npj Microgravity
3, 29 (2017).
70. Clément, G. & Traon, A. P. Le. Centrifugation as a countermeasure during actual
and simulated microgravity: a review. European Journal of Applied Physiology
Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-004-1118-1 (2004).
71. Vernikos, J., Paloski, W., Fuller, C. & Clèment, G. Recommended Research BT -
Artiﬁcial Gravity. in (eds. Clément, G. & Bukley, A.) 335–356 (Springer New York).
https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-70714-X_13. 2007.
72. van Loon, J. J. W. A. et al. A large human centrifuge for exploration and
exploitation research. Ann. Kinesiol. 3, 107–121 (2012).
73. Lackner, J. R. & DiZio, P. Dynamic Sensory-Motor Adaptation to Earth Gravity. In:
Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience
1–27 (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119170174.epcn220.
2018.
74. Young, L. R. & Paloski, W. H. Short radius intermittent centrifugation as a
countermeasure to bed-rest and 0-G deconditioning: IMAG pilot study summary
and recommendations for research. J. Gravit. Physiol. 14, P31-3 (2007).
75. Clément, G. R., Bukley, A. P. & Paloski, W. H. Artiﬁcial gravity as a countermeasure
for mitigating physiological deconditioning during long-duration space mis-
sions. Front Syst. Neurosci. 9, 92 (2015).
A.C. Stahn et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 

76. Stenger, M. B. et al. Artiﬁcial gravity training reduces bed rest-induced cardio-
vascular deconditioning. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 112, 605–616 (2012).
77. Linnarsson, D. et al. Effects of an artiﬁcial gravity countermeasure on orthostatic
tolerance, blood volumes and aerobic power after short-term bed rest (BR-AG1).
J. Appl. Physiol. 118, 29–35 (2015).
78. Zhang, Q., Evans, J. M., Stenger, M. B., Moore, F. B. & Knapp, C. F. Autonomic
cardiovascular responses to orthostatic stress after a short artiﬁcial gravity
exposure. Aerosp. Med. Hum. Perform. 88, 827–833 (2017).
79. Evans, J. M., Knapp, C. F. & Goswami, N. Artiﬁcial gravity as a countermeasure to
the cardiovascular deconditioning of spaceﬂight: gender perspectives. Front.
Physiol. 9, 716 (2018).
80. Symons, T. B., Shefﬁeld-Moore, M., Chinkes, D. L., Ferrando, A. A. & Paddon-
Jones, D. Artiﬁcial gravity maintains skeletal muscle protein synthesis during
21 days of simulated microgravity. J. Appl. Physiol. 107, 34–38 (2009).
81. Caiozzo, V. J. et al. Artiﬁcial gravity as a countermeasure to microgravity: a pilot
study examining the effects on knee extensor and plantar ﬂexor muscle groups.
J. Appl. Physiol. 107, 39–46 (2009).
82. Rittweger, J. et al. Short-arm centrifugation as a partially effective muscu-
loskeletal countermeasure during 5-day head-down tilt bed rest—results from
the BRAG1 study. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-015-3120-1
(2015).
83. Paloski, W. H., Reschke, M. F. & Feiveson, A. H. Bed rest and intermittent cen-
trifugation effects on human balance and neuromotor reﬂexes. Aerosp. Med.
Hum. Perform. 88, 812–818 (2017).
84. van Oosterhout, W., Terwindt, G., Vein, A. & Ferrari, M. Space headache on Earth:
head-down-tilted bed rest studies simulating outer-space microgravity. Cepha-
lalgia 35, 335–343 (2015).
85. Brandt, T. et al. Vestibular loss causes hippocampal atrophy and impaired spatial
memory in humans. Brain 128, 2732–2741 (2005).
86. Kim, M. & Maguire, E. A. Encoding of 3D head direction information in the
human brain. Hippocampus 29, 619–629 (2019).
87. Stackman, R. W. & Taube, J. S. Firing properties of head direction cells in the rat
anterior thalamic nucleus: dependence on vestibular input. J. Neurosci. 17,
4349–4358 (1997).
88. Jacob, P. Y., Poucet, B., Liberge, M., Save, E. & Sargolini, F. Vestibular control of
entorhinal cortex activity in spatial navigation. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 8, 38
(2014).
89. Aitken, P., Zheng, Y. & Smith, P. F. The modulation of hippocampal theta rhythm
by the vestibular system. J. Neurophysiol. 119, 548–562 (2018).
90. Lichterfeld, Y. et al. Hypergravity attenuates reactivity in primary murine
astrocytes. Biomedicines 10, 1966 (2022).
91. Brungs, S. et al. Hypergravity selectively augments neuronal in vitro differ-
entiation. FASEB J. 32, 897.1 (2018).
92. Voss, M. W., Vivar, C., Kramer, A. F. & van Praag, H. Bridging animal and human
models of exercise-induced brain plasticity. Trends Cogn. Sci. 17, 525–544 (2013).
93. Vivar, C., Potter, M. C. & van Praag, H. All about running: synaptic plasticity,
growth factors and adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci.
15, 189–210 (2013).
94. Erickson, K. I. et al. Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves
memory. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 3017–3022 (2011).
95. Fuss, J. et al. Exercise boosts hippocampal volume by preventing early age-
related gray matter loss. Hippocampus 24, 131–134 (2014).
96. Holzschneider, K. et al. Cardiovascular ﬁtness modulates brain activation asso-
ciated with spatial learning. Neuroimage 59, 3003–3014 (2012).
97. Bringoux, L., Blouin, J., Coyle, T., Ruget, H. & Mouchnino, L. Effect of gravity-like
torque on goal-directed arm movements in microgravity. J. Neurophysiol. 107,
2541–2548 (2012).
98. Kunavar, T. et al. Effects of local gravity compensation on motor control during
altered environmental gravity. Front. Neural Circuits 15, 750267 (2021).
99. Jamšek, M. et al. Effects of simulated microgravity and hypergravity conditions
on arm movements in normogravity. Front. Neural Circuits 15, 750176 (2021).
100. Moss, F., Ward, L. M. & Sannita, W. G. Stochastic resonance and sensory infor-
mation processing: a tutorial and review of application. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115,
267–281 (2004).
101. White, O., Johannsen, L., Goswami, N., Trenado, C. & Babič, J. The promise of
stochastic resonance in falls prevention. Front. Physiol. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphys.2018.01865 (2019).
102. Stahn, A. C. & Kühn, S. Brains in space: the importance of understanding the
impact of long-duration spaceﬂight on spatial cognition and its neural circuitry.
Cogn. Process. 22, 105–114 (2021).
103. Vernikos, J., Walter, N., Worms, J. C. & Blanc, S. THESEUS: the European research
priorities for human exploration of space. Npj Microgravity 2, 1–3 (2016).
104. Stahn, A. C. & Kühn, S. Extreme environments for understanding brain and
cognition. Trends Cogn. Sci. 26, 1–3 (2022).
105. Choukér, A. & Stahn, A. C. COVID-19—the largest isolation study in history: the
value of shared learnings from spaceﬂight analogs. Npj Microgravity 6, 32 (2020).
106. Anderson-Hanley, C. et al. Exergaming and older adult cognition: a cluster
randomized
clinical
trial.
Am.
J.
Prev.
Med.
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.amepre.2011.10.016 (2012).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the European Space Agency (ESA).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors were part of an ESA working group to identify the challenges for
neurosciences research in future space exploration. Therefore, content credits are
shared among all the authors.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A. C. Stahn or O.
White.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from
the
copyright
holder.
To
view
a
copy
of
this
license,
visit
http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
A.C. Stahn et al.
10
npj Microgravity (2023)  59 
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
