communications biology
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Tardigrade secretory proteins protect
biological structures from desiccation
Check for updates
Samuel Lim1,2, Charles B. Reilly2, Zeina Barghouti
3, Benedetto Marelli
4, Jeffrey C. Way1,2 &
Pamela A. Silver
1,2
Tardigrades, microscopic animals that survive a broad range of environmental stresses, express a
unique set of proteins termed tardigrade-speciﬁc intrinsically disordered proteins (TDPs). TDPs are
often expressed at high levels in tardigrades upon desiccation, and appear to mediate stress
adaptation. Here, we focus on the proteins belonging to the secreted family of tardigrade proteins
termed secretory-abundant heat soluble (“SAHS”) proteins, and investigate their ability to protect
diverse biological structures. Recombinantly expressed SAHS proteins prevent desiccated liposomes
from fusion, and enhance desiccation tolerance of E. coli and Rhizobium tropici upon extracellular
application. Molecular dynamics simulation and comparative structural analysis suggest a model by
which SAHS proteins may undergo a structural transition upon desiccation, in which removal of water
and solutes from a large internal cavity in SAHS proteins destabilizes the beta-sheet structure. These
results highlight the potential application of SAHS proteins as stabilizing molecules for preservation
of cells.
Water is the universal solvent essential for survival. However, several
organisms demonstrate remarkable abilities to withstand an almost com-
plete loss of water for a prolonged time and recover upon rehydration1,2.
Thisphenomenonof“anhydrobiosis”,or“lifewithoutwater”hasattracteda
great deal of attention because it may reveal Nature’s strategies to endure
adverse environments and open up ways to achieve efﬁcient preservation of
living matter. However, the precise mechanisms behind anhydrobiosis
remain elusive, as they may involve a complex combination of protective
proteins, solutes, and cellular machinery working in a concert3.
Several molecules have been identiﬁed as mediators of desiccation
tolerance in various organisms. One is the disaccharide trehalose, which
accumulates in a large quantity in animals such as brine shrimps or
nematodes4. Trehalose uptake enhances the survival of yeast and human
cells under drying conditions and may protect dehydrated cells by vitriﬁ-
cation (turning the cell interior into a glass-like state)4–6. Several “intrinsi-
cally disordered proteins (IDPs)”, which lack ﬁxed tertiary structure, have
also been associated with desiccation tolerance2. For instance, late
embryogenesis-abundant (LEA) proteins are tolerance molecules found in
plant seeds and anhydrobiotic species7. LEA proteins are mostly unstruc-
tured in an aqueous environment and assume helical structure upon
desiccation to alleviate damage due to drying7,8.
Recent studies on the survival mode of tardigrades revealed novel
classes of stress proteins. Tardigrades (water bears) are microscopic
animals that can survive under a broad range of environmental stressors,
including desiccation, high and low temperatures, radiation, and even
exposure to outer space9–11. Tardigrades express LEA proteins, and also
three different families termed “tardigrade disordered proteins” (TDPs)
unique to the phylum Tardigrada12. Some of these TDPs are highly dis-
ordered and less likely to undergo aggregation at high temperatures. (The
classiﬁcationofTDPs asdisorderedproteinsis basedona sequence-based
prediction13.) Three different groups of TDPs were termed cytoplasmic-,
mitochondrial- and secretory-abundant heat soluble (CAHS, MAHS,
SAHS) proteins according to their putative subcellular localization
(Fig. 1a). In each family, the proteins show sequence similarity14,15. TDPs
are either constitutively expressed at high levels or enriched upon
desiccation and knocking out even one CAHS or SAHS gene can cause
diminished desiccation tolerance13.
SAHS proteins are classiﬁed as secreted as they are generally encoded
with signal sequences and are exported to the extracellular space upon
expression in eukaryotes14. Sequence-based structural prediction suggested
that, unlike CAHS and MAHS proteins that are estimated to be highly
disordered, the 42 putative SAHS proteins from tardigrade species Hypsi-
bius exemplaris, Ramazzottius varieornatus, Paramacrobiotus richtersi and
Milnesium tardigradum are more ordered13. Fukuda et al. solved the
structureofR.varieornatusSAHS1andSAHS416,17,experimentallyverifying
that, at least under hydrated conditions, the SAHS proteins have deﬁned
1Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 2Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. 3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 4Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
e-mail: pamela_silver@hms.harvard.edu
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

Fig. 1 | Classiﬁcation and sequence analysis of tardigrade SAHS proteins.
a Classiﬁcation of tardigrade-speciﬁc desiccation-protective proteins. Tardigrades
express unique sets of proteins termed tardigrade-speciﬁc intrinsically disordered
proteins (TDPs). TDPs are further classiﬁed into three different subgroups, Cyto-
solic-, Mitochondrial- and Secretory-abundant heat soluble (C/M/SAHS) proteins,
based on their subcellular localization. Created with BioRender.com. b An align-
ment of SAHS1-13 of R. varieornatus, SAHS4 of H. exemplaris, and two FABP (fatty
acid binding protein) sequences, with amino acids whose side chains point inward
toward the open cavity highlighted in orange, and those with side chains in the
hydrophobic core highlighted in cyan. Underlined amino acid sequences at the
N-termini of SAHS9, 10 and 12 are newly identiﬁed based on analysis of the R.
varieornatus genome sequence. Underlined and bold sequences are putative
N-linked glycosylation sites based on the consensus sequence Asn-X-Ser/Thr (X
not Pro).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
2

structures, and their description as “intrinsically disordered proteins” is not
accurate. RvSAHS1 and 4 proteins share sequence and structural similarity
to fatty acid binding proteins (FABPs): their structures include β-barrels
with large internal cavities that correspond to the fatty acid binding pockets
in FABPs16,17. The function of these large cavities in the SAHS proteins is
unclear,asistheirbiochemicalmechanisminprotectingagainstdesiccation.
Additionally, AlphaFold structures are available on the protein structure
database(PDB)forallSAHSproteinsidentiﬁedfromR.varieornatusandH.
exemplaris.
In this study, we investigated SAHS proteins from tardigrades R.
varieornatus and Hypsibius exemplaris for their potential to protect various
biological structures from desiccation-induced damage. We expressed four
different SAHS proteins and found that they can speciﬁcally protect lipo-
somes and bacterial cells but not enzymes upon desiccation. SAHS proteins
Fig. 2 | Tardigrade SAHS proteins stabilize liposomes from desiccation-induced
damage. POPC liposomes at 1.4 mg/mL were dried with and without the addition of
SAHS proteins and BSA at varying concentrations of 0.1–10 mg/mL, and their size
distributions were measured by DLS. a Size distribution of non-dried POPC
liposomes. b Size distribution of POPC liposomes dried and rehydrated without
additives. c–h Size distributions of the liposomes dried with c RvSAHS1,
d RvSAHS4, e HeSAHS4, f RvSAHS6, g BSA, and h trehalose.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
3

undergo structural changes under dehydration with triﬂuoroethanol.
Finally, we performed molecular dynamic and bioinformatic analyses to
identify structural features of the SAHS proteins that may contribute to
desiccation protection. These studies lead to a model for SAHS protein
action, and also illustrate that SAHS proteins may be practical preservatives
for cells in commercial applications.
Results
Protein sequence analysis and expression
We selected 12 SAHS proteins from R. varieornatus and one from H.
exemplaris to test for expression in the E. coli cytoplasm (Table S1). R.
varieornatus is the most desiccation-resistant tardigrade and is well-char-
acterized; a draft genome sequence is available, and crystal structures of two
SAHS proteins from this organism have been solved16,17. We used the
TargetP program18 that computationally predicts protein subcellular loca-
lization based on the N-terminal signal peptide, which predicted that only 8
out of 12 SAHS proteins would be secreted (Table S2). However, the sur-
prising implication that some of the SAHS proteins might not be secreted
also caused us to investigate genomic regions encoding these genes.
We found that the “short” SAHS protein sequences in Uniprot that
lack amino acids corresponding to the ﬁrst ~40 amino acids of mature
SAHS1 and SAHS4 may be incorrectly annotated; an alignment shown in
Fig. 5 of Fukuda et al.16 shows three such proteins of the 13 SAHS proteins
encoded by R. varieornatus. For example, the DNA encoding RvSAHS9
contains a splice acceptor immediately upstream of the putative start codon,
further preceded by a splice donor and an in-frame coding sequence that
encodes an amino acid sequence that aligns well with the N-terminus of
other SAHS proteins; RvSAHS10 and RvSAHS12 have a similar organiza-
tion (Fig. 1b; Supplementary Discussion). In each case, the new putative
intron has a consensus splice donor, but the polypyrimidine tract of the
splice acceptor has rather few pyrimidines, which may have misled the
automated systemsthat analyzed the genomic sequences.When splicedout,
the new N-terminal amino acid sequences align well with the other SAHS
mature proteinN-termini. We have further identiﬁedother candidate splice
sites in these genes (Supplementary Discussion).
We recombinantly expressed the Uniprot-predicted mature proteins
RvSAHS1–4andRvSAHS6-12aswellasHeSAHS4intheE. Colicytoplasm.
The target proteins were expressed with an N-terminal SUMO tag, whose
cleavage with a highly speciﬁc protease leaves the protein “scarless” without
any extraneous amino acids remaining (Fig. S1a)19. Since the N-terminal
signal sequences are expected to be cleaved during secretion, we expressed
proteins without these sequences based on the cleavage sites predicted by
TargetP (Table S3). We successfully expressed and puriﬁed 4 proteins
(RvSAHS1,4,6,andHeSAHS4)withhighsolubleexpressionandpurityand
conducted subsequent studies using them (Figs. S1, S2).
SAHS proteins stabilize liposomes from dehydration-
induced damage
As a ﬁrst step of assessing the protective potential of SAHS proteins, we
tested if they can stabilize lipid membranes upon dehydration-induced
damages, using 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC)
liposomes as a model membrane. Prior to drying, the diameter of the
liposomesasmeasuredbydynamiclightscattering(DLS)wasintherangeof
50-100 nm (Fig. 2a). Upon drying and rehydration at 1.4 mg/mL lipid
concentration, less than 10% of the particles remained in this range, while
larger particles appeared around 360 and 4000 nm (Fig. 2b). This marked
increase in particle diameter indicated that dehydration damaged liposome
membranes and promoted their fusion and/or aggregation20.
Liposomes dried in the presence of SAHS proteins or other excipients
at 10, 1, and 0.1 mg/mL concentrations were partially protected, with higher
levels of excipient providing more protection. For all four SAHS proteins
tested, particle sizes after a dehydration-rehydration cycle were notably
smaller compared to those dried without an excipient (Figs. 2c–f and S3).
Whilethediametersofthemajorpeakswereslightlyincreasedfrom~60 nm
to ~100 nm, none of the bigger particles having diameters larger than
200 nm were observed, which indicated that the addition of SAHS proteins
prevented the fusion and aggregation of dried liposomes. Bovine serum
albumin (BSA), a commonly used excipient for protein preservation, was
lesseffectiveinprotectingliposomesthanSAHSproteins,asindicatedbythe
signal in ~500 nm range (Fig. 2g). Liposomes dried in 10 mg/mL trehalose
showed no particles over 150 nm, suggesting that trehalose also prevented
membranefusionof dried liposomes(Fig. 2h).These observationsindicated
that SAHS proteins have comparable effects to trehalose in terms of their
ability to stabilize membranes. SAHS proteins at lower concentrations of
1 mg/mL were also able to protect liposomes, whereas at 0.1 mg/mL, the
extent of protection was diminished, and larger aggregates ~1000 nm were
formed (Fig. 2c–f, dotted lines); also, the repeat experiments showed con-
sistent results (Fig. S3).
Fig. 3 | Tardigrade SAHS proteins enhance bac-
terial desiccation survival. a E. Coli cells were dried
for 48 h with and without the addition of 0.5 mg/mL
concentration of SAHS proteins, BSA and trehalose.
Survival percentage was calculated by comparing the
number of viable colonies after plating the rehy-
drated cells to the initial number of cells added. b R.
tropici cells were dried for 48 h with and without the
addition of 0.5 mg/mL concentration of SAHS
proteins, BSA, and trehalose. Survival percentage
was calculated in the same way as the E. coli
experiment. Individual data points represent inde-
pendent replicates, and lines represent the mean
survival. Student’s t-test was used to determine the
statistical signiﬁcance between the negative control
(no excipient) and each group, which is indicated as
asterisks. * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
4

SAHS proteins enhance survival of desiccated bacterial cells
We then tested whether extracellularly added SAHS proteins can enhance
the desiccation tolerance of bacterial cells (Figs. 3 and S4). E. Coli cells were
dried for 48 h at 108 cells/mL with 0.5 mg/mL of SAHS proteins. As mea-
sured by colony-forming units, E. coli showed enhanced survival compared
to those dried without added excipients or with BSA, lactate dehydrogenase,
or citrate synthase proteins (Fig. S4a), indicating that this was not a general
effect caused by adding high concentration of protein. RvSAHS1 provided
the most reproducible protection of E. coli, with all replicates in each
experiment showing >10-fold enhancement of survival. At 0.1 mg/mL
RvSAHS1,theprotective effect decreasedbutwas stillstatistically signiﬁcant
(Fig. S4b). Trehalose, a well-known cryoprotectant that is expressed intra-
cellularly in many organisms during desiccation, also protected E. coli
against drying when added extracellularly, but not as strongly as RvSAHS1.
Intracellular expression of SAHS proteins showed no clear-cut enhance-
ment of E. coli survival upon desiccation (Fig. S4c, d).
We also tested if the SAHS proteins could enhance the desiccation
survival of the plant-symbiotic bacterium Rhizobium tropici, which is a
model organism for nitrogen-ﬁxing biofertilizers. When R.tropici cells were
dried at a concentration of 7.2 × 109 cells/mL with and without 0.5 mg/mL
excipients, we observed ~40-fold enhancement of cell survival upon addi-
tion of SAHS proteins (Fig. 3b). Cells dried with trehalose at 0.5 mg/mL
concentration showed 16-fold increased survival, while 0.5 mg/mL BSA
caused a 4.2-fold increased survival.
SAHS proteins and BSA protect enzymes from dehydration-
induced inactivation
Tardigrade proteins such as CAHS have been shown to protect desiccated
enzyme activities21. We tested if the SAHS proteins can preserve an enzyme,
speciﬁcally lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), from desiccation-induced inac-
tivation in vitro. When dried, LDH (0.01 mg/mL) alone lost >90% of its
activity compared to the non-dried control. The four SAHS proteins helped
preserve LDH activity as a function of increasing concentration from 0.001
to 5 mg/mL, but BSA’s protective effect was comparable at each con-
centration (Figure S5). This observation contrasts with the speciﬁc effect of
SAHS proteins vs. BSA on the protection of membranous structuressuch as
liposomes and cells.
Structural changes of SAHS proteins under desolvated
conditions
ToinvestigatethebehaviorsofSAHSproteinsuponwaterloss,weexamined
their secondary structures using circular dichroism (CD). CD spectra of all
four SAHS proteins showed minima at ~215 nm, indicating that they adopt
β-structures under aqueous conditions (Fig. 4a). This result was consistent
with previous literature reporting β-sheet structures in RvSAHS1 and
SAHS414,16,17. The CD spectra for SAHS1 and SAHS4 at 0% in aqueous
solution correlate well with the solved structures of these proteins, which
have a single short alpha helix and are dominated by beta strands.
To investigate if these proteins can change their structures upon
environmental stress, we used increasing concentrations of triﬂuoroethanol
(TFE) and glycerol to mimic water-deﬁcit conditions. All four proteins
remained mostly β-stranded up to 25% TFE added but displayed a notable
increase in helical structures at 50% TFE. At 50–75% TFE, all proteins
showed spectra with two minima around 208 and 222 nm, which are
characteristic of α-helices. This result is consistent with the earlier report by
Yamaguchi et al., in which RvSAHS1 adopted a more helical structure with
the addition of TFE14. Calculating relative secondary structure content
conﬁrmed that the helical content in these proteins increased from 10% up
to 40% with the addition of TFE (Fig. 4b). In contrast, increasing con-
centrations of glycerol had no such effect, even though glycerol is a
‘crowding’ agent (Fig. S6).
A ﬁlamentous, mesh-like structure was observed from dried RvSAHS1
proteins upon transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging (Fig. S7).
RvSAHS1 proteins dried at a concentration of 1 mg/mL revealed an
entangled network of ﬁbrous structures, while those dried at a higher
concentration of 10 mg/mL showed a denser network that covered most of
thegrid.SuchobservationssuggestedthatRvSAHS1mayundergostructural
changes upon loss of water to allow for higher-order structure formation.
To further investigate the pathway for structural change of SAHS
proteins, we conducted a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of the
RvSAHS1protein.Toaccount for the possible inter-proteininteractions, we
ﬁrst generated a water bath with three copies of a RvSAHS1 monomer, and
the simulation was conducted using explicit solvent, openMM, and the
Amber force ﬁeld. The simulation was performed for a microsecond at
550 Ktoinducethebreakingofhydrogenbondsinatimeframeamenableto
simulation. We found that the root mean squared deviation (RMSD) of
alpha carbons in the ensemble relative to the starting structures increased
within the ﬁrst 100 ns and then plateaued for the remainder of the 1 µs
(Figs. 5a, S8). As the simulation progressed, RvSAHS1 proteins showed the
structural unfolding of beta-sheet structures and formation of alpha-helices:
the beta-sheet component decreased from ~50% to ~3%, and the alpha-
helical component increased from ~7% to ~20% as the simulation pro-
gressed from 0 to 100 ns (Fig. 5b).
Figure 5c shows the C-terminal segments of each monomer that are
conserved among SAHS proteins, which contribute signiﬁcantly to the
initial beta-barrel structure (identiﬁed as the C3 motif in ref. 14). As the
simulation progressed, this region highlighted how, as helices form, the
motifs between subunits may become more closely aligned during the
0–100 ns simulation period. Figure 5d indicates how the beta-sheet region
within the C3 motif, which is maintained through interactions between
positively and negatively charged amino acid residues, gets separated to
formahelixasthesimulationproceeds.Thesesequences,highlightedinblue
andred,werefoundtobehighlyconservedamongtheSAHSfamily(Fig.S9)
basedonourevolutionaryconservationanalysisusingConSurf 22,indicating
that such structural shifts may be a shared trait among SAHS proteins.
Structural bioinformatic analysis of SAHS proteins and related
binding proteins
To understand how SAHS proteins might undergo a dramatic transition
from a beta-sheet conformation to a predominantly alpha-helical state and
protectvesiclesandcellsduringdrying,weexaminedthesolvedstructuresof
RvSAHS1 and RvSAHS4, compared them with solved structures of fatty
acid binding proteins from higher organisms, and analyzed patterns of
sequence conservation.
The structures of RvSAHS1 and RvSAHS4 (PDB IDs 5xna and 5z4g),
fatty acid binding protein from human muscle (1hmr)23, the intracellular
lipid binding protein FABP1 (6do6)24 were examined, along with align-
ments of related sequences.
RvSAHS1 and RvSAHS4 are highly structured and similar to FABPs
and related proteins16,17. Thus, the description of these proteins as “intrin-
sically disordered proteins” is not accurate, at least in the hydrated state. All
of these proteins are unusual in that they have a large internal cavity that
may be ﬁlled with ligands, solvent molecules, or both. The sides of the cavity
are deﬁned by beta sheets that, for the most part, do not pack against a
typical hydrophobic core. In the RvSAHS1 and RvSAHS4 structures solved
by Fukuda and colleagues, this volume is occupied by solvent molecules.
In RvSAHS1, there is a small hydrophobic core, while the cavity is
bordered by beta-hairpin loops from Phe50-His72, His83-Val96, Thr106-
Ile113, Ala126-Asp139, and Lys150-Tyr163. (The Phe50-His72 loop also
contains two short alpha helices.) In the absence of a ligand in the cavity,
both faces of these loops are simply beta-sheetsthat face water on both sides.
Thus, these structures would not be as stabilized as in a typical protein. We
hypothesizethatduringadesiccationprocess,waterwouldequilibrateoutof
the cavity, and as the environment becomes more dehydrated, other more
stable proteins would pack against an SAHS protein, essentially crushing it
and disrupting the beta-sheet structure that surrounds the cavity. In this
way, the SAHS proteins could act as deformable packing material to prevent
other biological structures from deforming or rupturing during desiccation.
Among the 13 SAHS proteins of R. varieornatus, the amino acids
pointing into the small hydrophobic center are generally conserved, while
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
5

amino acids pointing into the cavity are not. The “hydrophobic core” is
located on one side of the much larger interior and includes the amino acids
Trp 32, Trp37, Met38, Trp41, Tyr64, Ile74, Trp75, Tyr81, Phe98, Leu100,
Leu124, Tyr141, Val143, Leu148, and Ala159. Of these, Trp 32, Trp37,
Met38,Trp41, Phe98,Leu100, Leu124, Tyr/Phe141, Val143,and Leu148 are
rather well conserved, while the others are not. We note that the highly
conserved tryptophans at positions 32, 37, and 41 are present in our newly
proposedsequencesforRvSAHS9,10,and12,supportingtheideathatthese
sequences were previously misannotated.
The amino acids pointing inward towards the cavity include Phe50,
Phe53, Ile54, Leu57, Leu59, His83, Ile85, Val87, Lys90, Tyr92, Asp94,
Thr106, His108, Leu113, Tyr115, Tyr117, Ala126, Val128, Val130, Ile137,
Asp139, Lys150, Tyr152, Arg151, and Tyr165. Most of these are within 4
Angstroms of ethylene glycol or the putative fatty acid in the
RvSAHS1 structure16. Of these, Phe53, Val/Ile87, Tyr117, Arg/Lys161 and
Tyr163 are largely conserved, and the hydrophobic residues Phe50, Ile54,
Ile85, Ile118, Val123, Val125, and Ile137 are generally interchangeable with
otherhydrophobicresidues.Arg/Lys161isnotablebecauseitisconserved in
fatty acid binding proteins and interacts with the carboxyl group in the fatty
acid in the same way that this amino acid interacts with a carboxyl group on
a putative fatty acid in the SAHS1 structure.
AnotherfeatureoftheSAHSproteinsandfattyacid-bindingproteinsis
the presence of an entry/exit point. In RvSAHS1, four turns deﬁne this area
—threebeta-hairpinswithtipsatLys90,Asn109,andSer132,andaone-turn
alphahelixwithGln63pointingtowardsthehole.Theaminoacidsequences
around this region are extremely variable among the R. varieornatus SAHS
proteins, with Gln63 and Ser132 near the edge of a gap in the alignment.
Moreover, since the SAHS proteins are secreted eukaryotic proteins, they
can undergo N-linked glycosylation at Asn-X-Ser/Thr sites (which are not
captured in proteins made in E. coli). The distribution of putative N-linked
glycosylationsitesinRvSAHS1-13isstronglybiasedtoward theaminoacids
surrounding the entry/exit site: Asn109 is likely N-glycosylated in
RvSAHS1, 2, 8, 10, and 11 (and Asn107 in RvSAHS5); in RvSAHS3, 8 and
9 sites near Gln63 are likely glycosylated; and in RvSAHS5, 9 and 11 sites
near Ser132 are glycosylated. RvSAHS4, 6, 12, and 13 do not have N-linked
glycosylation sites. Of the 14 putative N-linked glycosylation sites in
RvSAHS1-13, twelve are near the opening into the cavity. The presence/
absence and positioning of these sites may have a signiﬁcant effect on the
movement of water and other small molecules in and out of the cavity.
Fukuda etal. discussed the possibility that RvSAHS1 may bind a ligand
with a carboxyl group (e.g. acetate) but noted that not all of the SAHS
proteins have these carboxyl-binding residues17. Our analysis of alignments
oftheR.varieornatusSAHSproteinsindicatesagreatdealofvariationinthe
cavity-formingresidues,implyingthattheseproteinsdonotbindacommon
ligand (such as a fatty acid) if they bind one at all.
Based on this analysis and data presented here, we propose a model by
which the thirteen SAHS proteins encoded by R. varieornatus undergo a
transition upon dehydration in which water molecules equilibrate out of the
cavity and crowding and pressure of other proteins, then disrupt the
structure of the SAHS proteins, which then might reconﬁgure into a com-
pletely different conformation. The thirteen different SAHS proteins would
have different characteristics for stability and waterretention, such that they
would collapse under different conditions of dehydration and pressure,
allowing for a gradual process rather than a sudden phase transition. This
idea is explored further in the Discussion.
Discussion
In this study, we tested the proteins belonging to the SAHS family of tar-
digradeproteinsfortheirpotentialtoprotectdiversebiologicalstructures.In
addition, we observed that the SAHS proteins undergo structural shift upon
exposure to a desiccation-mimicking compound and used a diverse set of
experimental and computational approaches to suggest possible models of
how the structural transition of SAHS proteins might occur to protect
biological structures. Speciﬁcally, we found that the SAHS proteins protect
Fig. 4 | Tardigrade SAHS proteins undergo structural changes upon dehydration-mimicking conditions. a CD spectra of SAHS proteins upon the addition of increasing
amounts of TFE from 0% to 75%. b Secondary structure compositions of SAHS proteins under different TFE levels, calculated from the CD spectra.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
6

membrane-containing structures, speciﬁcally liposomes and living bacteria,
against desiccation-induced disruption but are no better than BSA at pro-
tecting the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase against desiccation. Based on CD
analysis, the SAHS proteins appear to undergo a shift from a primarily beta-
sheet structure to an alpha-helical structure in increasing TFE concentra-
tions (thought to be desiccation-mimicking conditions), and a 1 μs mole-
cular dynamic simulation showed that short alpha-helices can transiently
form upon denaturation of proteins. Lastly, we performed a comparative
structural analysis based on the available putative sequences of SAHS pro-
teins. In doing so, we found that sequences in the Uniprot database corre-
sponding to short (N-terminally truncated) SAHS proteins may have been
incorrectly annotated and that all SAHS proteins are likely secreted and
shareacommonstructure.Asnoted previously,SAHSproteinsaredistantly
relatedtofattyacid-bindingproteinsand consistof alarge cavityand asmall
hydrophobic core off to one side. Our structural analysis indicated that
amino acid side chains pointing into the cavity are variable, and putative
N-linked glycosylation sites are also variable in position but tend to cluster
around the opening from which solvent molecules might enter and exit.
SAHS proteins from the tardigrades R. varieornatus and H. exemplaris
are thought to contribute to the desiccation resistance of these organisms. R.
varieornatus and H. exemplaris encode multiple different SAHS proteins,
respectively, and at least some of them are constitutively expressed at high
levels13. It is not clear why so many members of the SAHS family are
encoded in these tardigrades or whether their diversity is important in
desiccation protection. We tested several different SAHS proteins for their
ability to be expressed in the E. coli cytoplasm without signal sequences.
From R. varieornatus, SAHS1, 2, 4, 6, 7, and 8 were expressed, while the
Uniprot-derived sequences of SAHS3, 9-12 were not. SAHS1, SAHS4, and
SAHS6fromR.varieornatusandSAHS4fromH.exemplariswereexpressed
at the highest levels (Fig. S2) and were characterized further.
The four tested SAHS proteins reduced the extent of liposome fusion
and bacterial loss of viability during desiccation. When a commercial
POPC-based liposome preparation was dried in the absence of excipients
and then rehydrated, the average diameter of the liposomes increased from
about 70 nm to about 350 nm, indicating that many liposomes fuse during
thisprocesstomakemuchlargeraggregates.Inthepresenceof10 mg/mLof
any of the SAHS proteins, the extent of liposome fusion was much reduced,
andevenatlowerconcentrations,therewasaprotectiveeffect.Theexcipient
disaccharide trehalose showed a comparable protective effect, while BSA
was less protective (Figs. 2, S3). When either E. coli or R. tropici was
desiccated and rehydrated, the SAHS proteins had a strong survival-
promoting effect, generally improving viability by about 50-fold and per-
forming at least 10-fold better than BSA and several other proteins and
about 3-fold better than trehalose (Figs. 3, S4). In addition, heterologous
intracellular expression of SAHS proteins did not signiﬁcantly improve E.
coli desiccation survival (Fig. S4) R. tropici is a nitrogen-ﬁxing plant sym-
biont that represents a working model for the preservation of nitrogen-
ﬁxing bacteria such as rhizobia and could itself be deployed as biofertilizer.
In contrast, the SAHS proteins did not speciﬁcally protect the enzyme
lactate dehydrogenase against loss of activity upon desiccation and rehy-
dration—theSAHS proteins had a slight effect,comparable to the protective
effect of BSA (Fig. S5). The ability to stabilize proteins/enzymes and prevent
their aggregation has been associated with intracellular stress protection25,26.
For instance, heterologous expressions of tardigrade small heat shock
proteins (sHSPs) improved bacterial desiccation survival, and their pro-
tective mechanism has been attributed to their ability to reduce protein
aggregation during desiccation27. Similarly, CAHS proteins, whose hetero-
logous expressions inbacteria and yeast enhancedtheir desiccation survival,
were superior to BSA in protecting enzymes from desiccation-induced
inactivation in vitro13,21. The SAHS proteins tested in this study are
Fig. 5 | MD simulation of SAHS protein structural change upon desolvation.
a RMSD over time during the ﬁrst 100 ns MD simulation of RvSAHS1 homotrimer.
Results during the ﬁrst 100 ns are magniﬁed. Different color indicates each mono-
mer chain in a trimer. Representative images of the RvSAHS1 protein structures
reconstituted from the MD simulation at 0, 50, and 100 ns time points are provided
at the top. b Changes in secondary structure components of RvSAHS1 during the
MD simulation. Red: coil; blue: helix; orange: sheet. c Representative image showing
how conserved beta-sheet motifs of RvSAHS1 become closely aligned upon struc-
tural shift into helices. Only the conserved C3 segments of RvSAHS1 of each
monomer are highlighted to show the changes in their alignments as the simulation
progresses. d Detailed image of C3 motif sheet-to-helix structural change. High-
lighted in blue and red are two highly conserved regions found within the beta-sheet
region that directly interact through ionic bonds. Structures of these regions at 0 and
180 ns are indicated.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
7

presumed to function extracellularly, and it might be that their main role is
not to protect proteins but to prevent damage to membranes.
The solved structures of two SAHS proteins and the pattern of amino
acid conservation in the SAHS proteins (Fig. 6) indicate that the SAHS
proteins all have a large cavity that may simply be full of water. (An alter-
native hypothesis, suggested by our AlphaFold-predicted structure of
multiple SAHS proteins,would be that the N-terminusof one SAHS protein
ﬁts into the cavity of another (Fig. S10); no independent evidence supports
this hypothesis.) The SAHS proteins are similar in sequence to fatty acid
binding proteins (FABPs), and the SAHS and FABP structures are super-
imposable. However, the amino acid side chains that point inward in the
SAHS protein cavity are not strongly conserved, suggesting that these
proteins are not binding to a particular ligand but may simply be ﬁlled with
water or withvariable solutes. Moreover, in FABPsthe cavity is signiﬁcantly
larger than can be occupied by a fatty acid, and since fatty acids are moving
in and out of the cavity during intracellular transport, they are presumably
exchanged with water in this process.
SAHS proteins, by analogy to CAHS proteins14, may undergo a shift to
an alternative conformation in desiccation conditions. A high-temperature
MD simulation of three SAHS proteins in a water box revealed that, as the
beta-barrel structure of the protein became disordered, short alpha-helical
regions would form and disappear (Fig. 5, S8). These structures might
nucleate the formation of an alternative,protective conformation. However,
the use of molecular dynamics to simulate desiccation is challenging
because, during actual desiccation, the concentration of other proteins
would increase and may play a dominating role in a conformational change
of SAHS proteins, for example, through Brownian collisions. Moreover,
desiccation occurs on long timescales that cannot be simulated with current
molecular dynamics technology.
One model for the protective mechanism of SAHS proteins is that the
SAHS protein cavity is ﬁlled with water and possibly other solutes in the
hydrated state, but during dehydration, the water is extruded. Thus, the
SAHS protein would collapse as a result of the Brownian motion of mac-
romolecules and pressure on the outside of the protein without a corre-
sponding pressure from the inside. This would lead to the denaturation of
the protein and transition to an alternative, protective conformation. The
different SAHS proteins may have different kinetics and equilibria for this
transition, such that when a tardigrade is dehydrated, there is a gradual
conversion of the different SAHSproteinsto a protectivestate. The presence
or absence and positioning of N-linked oligosaccharides in the different
SAHS proteins near the entry/exit point may give them distinct
dehydration-transition characteristics. After the conversion from a globular
conformation, the SAHS proteins may form higher-order, gel-like struc-
tures that stabilize membrane-bound elements of cells, which may con-
stitute rampart-like “special extracellular structure (SES)” observed outside
of the secretory cell membranes of dried tardigrade28.
SAHS proteins may have a practical application in protecting non-
tardigrade cells, such as agricultural microbes, against desiccation. We
found that two bacteria, E. coli and R. tropici, could be stabilized against
desiccation by the presence of a single SAHS protein. R. tropici is a “plant-
growth promoting rhizobacterium,” and PGPR use is often limited by their
low desiccation tolerance29,30, highlighting the potential applicability of
SAHS proteins to improve the durability of microbial biofertilizers. Also,
desiccation would enable easier and lower-cost transportation and safer
handling of these microbes in the ﬁeld. In summary, this work provides the
evaluation of tardigrade SAHS proteins in terms of their protective abilities,
which supports their potential applications as stabilizing molecules.
Methods
Sequence analysis
SAHS protein sequences used for expression in E. coli (Figure S2) were
obtained from Uniprot database (https://www.uniprot.org). Protein sub-
cellular localization and signal peptides were predicted using TargetP 2.0
server available at https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk18. Genomic sequences
encoding R. varieornatus SAHS proteins were from the Ramazzottius
varieornatus contig Scaffold001, strain YOKOZUNA-1, whole genome
shotgun sequence, GenBank accession number BDGG01000001, which
encodes SAHS1-12, and Ramazzottius varieornatus contig Scaffold002,
GenBank accession number BDGG01000002, which encodes SAHS 13.
Protein expression and puriﬁcation
Expression vectors encoding His6/SUMO-tagged SAHS proteins were
obtained from Twist Bioscience and transformed into LEMO21(DE3)
competentcells(NewEnglandBiolabs)accordingtotheprovider’sprotocol.
Transformed cells were grown in TBM-5052 autoinduction media con-
taining 100 µg/mL Kanamycin, 25 µg/mL Chloramphenicol, and 2 mM L-
rhamnose at 37 °C overnight. The cells were harvested by centrifugation at
4000×g for 10 min, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM NaH2PO4, 500 mM
NaCl, 20 mM Imidazole, pH 7.5) supplemented with 0.25 mg/mL lysozyme
(Millipore Sigma), turbonuclease (Accelagen) and 1% n-Nonyl-Beta-D-
Glucopyranoside (Cube Biotech) and shaken vigorously for 1 h. The total
lysate was then centrifuged at 4000×g for 30 min, and the supernatant was
obtained. This clariﬁed protein lysate was then shaken with Ni-charged
IMAC Magbeads (Genscript) for 1 h to bind tagged proteins. Beads were
then washed 3 times with wash buffer (20 mM NaH2PO4, 500 mM NaCl,
20 mM Imidazole, pH 7.5), washed once more with PBS buffer, and incu-
bated with PBS buffer supplemented with Cth SUMO protease19 at 0.02 mg/
mL shaking overnight to achieve the cleavage of SAHS proteins from
N-terminal SUMO tag. Cleaved proteins were recovered from the super-
natant, ﬁltered through 0.2 µm ﬁlters, concentrated using Amicon ultra 0.5
centrifugal columns (Millipore, 10 kDa MWCO), and stored at −20 °C.
Puriﬁed proteins were inspected using SDS–PAGE and SimplyBlue staining
(Invitrogen).
Circular dichroism
Proteins were buffer exchanged by overnight dialysis with 20 mM
NaH2PO4, pH 7.5, and diluted to a ﬁnal concentration of 0.25 mg/mL.
Protein secondary structure was examined using far-UV circular dichroism
(CD) using a Jasco J-815 CD spectropolarimeter equipped with a Peltier
temperature controller and single cuvette holder. The CD spectra were
obtained byaveragingthreewavelengthscansfrom200to260 nmin0.5 nm
steps in a cuvette with a pathlength of 1 mm. To examine protein secondary
structures in water loss-mimicking conditions and molecular crowding
conditions, triﬂuoroethanol (TFE) or glycerol was added to the sample at
ﬁnal concentrations ranging from 25% to 75% and incubated for two hours
before determining the CD spectra.
Lactate dehydrogenase inactivation assay
L-lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) enzyme (Roche) was diluted to 0.01 mg/mL
concentration in 100 µL of 25 mM Tris/HCl buffer containing various
concentrations of SAHS proteins or BSA (Sigma-Aldrich). BSA were dia-
lyzed against the same buffer prior to use. 50 µL of each sample was stored at
4 °C while the other 50 µL was dried using a Savant SPD131DDA SpeedVac
(Thermo Scientiﬁc) for 2 h without heating. Dried samples were rehydrated,
and activity was measured at 50× dilution in a buffer containing 100 mM
sodiumphosphate(pH6),100 µMNADH,and2 mMpyruvate.Absorbance
at 340 nm was measured using a Synergy H1 plate reader (BioTek). Relative
activity after dehydration was calculated by comparing the initial linear
reaction rate of the dried sample to that of the non-dried control sample.
Liposome drying assay
POPC liposomes (100 nm, Tribioscience) dialyzed against PBS buffer were
diluted to1.4 mg/mL in 50 µL PBS buffercontainingvarious concentrations
of proteins and excipients. Proteins were dialyzed against the PBS buffer
prior to use. Samples were then dried in a 250 µL microcentrifuge tube with
an opened lid placed inside a 750-mL sealed chamber ﬁlled with about 42
grams of Drierite desiccant for 48 h at room temperature. Samples were
rehydratedand diluted 10-fold, and the liposome sizes were measured using
a Wyatt DynaPro Plate Reader III dynamic light scattering (DLS) device.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
8

Bacterial cell drying assay
E. coli vectors expressing SAHS proteins without SUMO tags and with an
N-terminal methionine were custom-ordered and obtained from Twist
Bioscience and transformed into LEMO21(DE3) competent cells (NEB). To
test for the effects of intracellular SAHS expression, cells transformed with
each SAHS protein as well as mEGFP expression vector were grown in LB
medium
containing
100 µg/mL
Kanamycin
and
25 µg/mL
Chlor-
amphenicol at 37 °C until OD600 of 0.6, added with 0.1 mM IPTG and 2
mM L-rhamnose and further grown at room temperature overnight. Cells
wereharvested and resuspended inPBS buffer and diluted to contain5 × 106
cellsin50 µLPBSbuffer.Cellswerethendriedinamicrocentrifugetubewith
anopenedlidplacedinsideasealedchamberﬁlledwithDrieritedesiccantfor
48 h at room temperature. Subsequently, cells were rehydrated and imme-
diately plated onto LB-agar Kan/Cm selection plates with a serial dilution to
count the colony-forming units the next day. To test for protection by
extracellularSAHS proteins,LEMO21(DE3) cellstransformedwithmEGFP
expression vector were grown in LB medium containing 100 µg/mL
Kanamycin, 25 µg/mL Chloramphenicol at 37 °C overnight, without any
rhamnose and inducer added. Subsequently, cells were harvested and
resuspended in PBS buffer and diluted to contain 5 × 106 cells in 50 µL PBS
buffer supplemented with varying concentrations of SAHS proteins or other
control excipients, dried, and rehydrated following the above protocol. BSA
and excipients were dialyzed against the PBS buffer prior to use.
For R. tropici drying assay, R. tropici CIAT 899 cells were grown in PY
media overnight in round-bottom culture tubes. The culture tubes were
placed in an incubator set to 28 °C and shaken at 200 rpm, then transferred
tolargervolumeﬂasksthefollowingday.Followingincubation,thebacterial
culturewascentrifugedat4000×gfor15 min.Theresultingpelletswerethen
resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and diluted to reach an
OD600 of 0.4. The cultures were centrifuged again, and the supernatant was
replaced with PBS buffer containing excipients. The solutions were pipetted
into 250 µL tubes in 100 µL aliquots to contain a total of 7.2 × 108 cells and
placed inside a sealed container with Drierite desiccant (10–20 mesh,
Thermo Scientiﬁc) to allow the samples to dry for 48 h. Once the samples
were dried, three samples of each condition were taken out at relevant time
points and resuspended in PBS. Subsequently, the samples were diluted and
spread onto PY agar plates for colony counting.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
SAHS proteins in PBS buffer were imaged by transmission electron micro-
scopy using a Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTWIN TEM equipped with an AMT 2k
CCD camera. TEM samples were prepared by depositing proteins onto
carbon/formvarcoatedcoppergrids,stainingwith2%uranylacetatesolution.
Computational modeling and conservation analysis of RvSAHS1
An initial structure for RvSAHS1 was generated using alphaFold using the
sequence acquired from UniProt with the accession code J7MFT5.
Ambertools generated amber input ﬁles with the ff19SB forceﬁeld and
explicitTIP3solventconditions.OpenMMwasusedtosimulate1000 nsata
temperature of 550 K after an equilibration at 310 K for 1 ns. Trajectories
were generated with conformations captured every 10 ps. RMSD analysis of
the simulation trajectory was performed using the Python package mdtraj.
Visualizations of protein structures were produced using Houdini (SideFX
software) and the Python packages mdtraj, biopython, and prody. Addi-
tional details of computational methods are in Supplementary Information,
and structural details are included in Supplementary Data 2.
Evolutionary
conservation
analysis
was
performed
on
the
RvSAHS1 sequence (J7MFT5) using ConSurf and the default parameters,
where 60 homologs were collected from the UNIREF90 database using
HMMER. Of these, 24 homologs passed the default thresholds (min/max
similarity, coverage, etc.), and 25 were CD-HIT unique. The conservation
calculations were conducted on the 25 unique hits, including the
initial query.
Statistics and reproducibility
For the desiccation survival experiments, the Student’s t-test was used to
determine the statistical signiﬁcance between the negative control (no
excipient) and cells dried with SAHS proteins or excipients. The number of
independent replicates is noted in the ﬁgure legend and separately attached
source data. For the enzyme activity assay, the number of replicates is noted
in the ﬁgure legend and source data.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
All data are either contained within the manuscript/supporting information
or available from the authors upon request. Source data for ﬁgures are
included in Supplementary Data 1. Supplementary Data 2 includes the
initialstructuralpdbﬁleoftheMDsimulationandthoseattimepointsof50,
100, 150, 200, 250, and 300 ns. Bacterial expression plasmids for the pro-
duction of recombinant SAHS proteins can be acquired from Addgene
(Addgene plasmid ID 215645–215648).
Received: 5 December 2023; Accepted: 15 May 2024;
References
1.
Moberg, N. et al. Survival in extreme environments—on the current
knowledge of adaptations in tardigrades. Acta Physiol. 202,
409–420 (2011).
2.
Boothby, T. C. & Pielak, G. J. Intrinsically disordered proteins and
desiccation tolerance: elucidating functional and mechanistic
underpinnings of anhydrobiosis. BioEssays 39, 1700119 (2017).
3.
Belott, C., Janis, B. & Menze, M. A. Liquid–liquid phase separation
promotes animal desiccation tolerance. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
117, 27676–27684 (2020).
4.
Tanaka, A. et al. Stress-dependent cell stiffening by tardigrade
tolerance proteins that reversibly form a ﬁlamentous network and gel.
PLoS Biol. 20, e3001780 (2022).
5.
Tapia, H., Young, L., Fox, D., Bertozzi, C. R. & Koshland, D. Increasing
intracellular trehalose is sufﬁcient to confer desiccation tolerance to
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,
6122–6127 (2015).
6.
Li, S. et al. Late embryogenesis abundant proteins protect human
hepatoma cells during acute desiccation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
109, 20859–20864 (2012).
Fig. 6 | Glycosylation sites in the SAHS proteins of R. varieornatus cluster near
the cavity opening. a Structure of SAHS1 from Fukuda et al.16, showing an alpha-
carbon trace of all amino acids, with the beta-hairpins surrounding the cavity
colored in yellow, yellow-orange, orange and red. Amino acids in cyan with side
chains shown deﬁne the hydrophobic core. Large spheres show the alpha carbons
of asparagines in an Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequence in at least one SAHS protein. The
putative opening of the cavity is on the left. b Structure of SAHS1, rotated 90 °C
relative to panel A with the left side coming forward. All the side chains are
shown. This view illustrates the opening into the cavity of the protein, such that
the cyan-colored hydrophobic core side chains at the back of the protein can be
seen through this hole.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
9

7.
Hand, S. C., Menze, M. A., Toner, M., Boswell, L. & Moore, D. LEA
proteins during water stress: not just for plants anymore. Annu. Rev.
Physiol. 73, 115–134 (2011).
8.
Veling, M. T. et al. Natural and designed proteins inspired by
extremotolerant organisms can form condensates and attenuate
apoptosis in human cells. ACS Synth. Biol. 11, 1292–1302 (2022).
9.
Persson, D. et al. Extreme stress tolerance in tardigrades: surviving
space conditions in low earth orbit. J. Zool. Syst. Evol. Res. 49,
90–97 (2011).
10. Hengherr, S., Heyer, A. G., Köhler, H. R. & Schill, R. O. Trehalose and
anhydrobiosis in tardigrades—evidence for divergence in responses
to dehydration. FEBS J. 275, 281–288 (2008).
11. Ingemar Jonsson, K. & Persson, O. Trehalose in three species of
desiccation tolerant tardigrades. Open Zool. J. 3, 1–5 (2010).
12. Hesgrove, C. & Boothby, T. C. The biology of tardigrade disordered
proteins in extreme stress tolerance. Cell Commun. Signal. 18,
178 (2020).
13. Boothby, T. C. et al. Tardigrades use intrinsically disordered proteins
to survive desiccation. Mol. Cell 65, 975–984 (2017).
14. Yamaguchi, A. et al. Two novel heat-soluble protein families
abundantly expressed in an anhydrobiotic tardigrade. PLoS ONE 7,
e44209 (2012).
15. Tanaka, S. et al. Novel mitochondria-targeted heat-soluble proteins
identiﬁed in the anhydrobiotic tardigrade improve osmotic tolerance
of human cells. PLoS ONE 10, e0118272 (2015).
16. Fukuda, Y., Miura, Y., Mizohata, E. & Inoue, T. Structural insights into a
secretory abundant heat‐soluble protein from an anhydrobiotic
tardigrade,Ramazzottiusvarieornatus.FEBSLett.591,2458–2469(2017).
17. Fukuda, Y. & Inoue, T. Crystal structure of secretory abundant heat
soluble protein 4 from one of the toughest “water bears” micro‐
animals Ramazzottius varieornatus. Protein Sci. 27, 993–999 (2018).
18. Emanuelsson, O., Nielsen, H., Brunak, S. & Von Heijne, G. Predicting
subcellular localization of proteins based on their N-terminal amino
acid sequence. J. Mol. Biol. 300, 1005–1016 (2000).
19. Lau, Y. T. et al. Discovery and engineering of enhanced SUMO
protease enzymes. J. Biol. Chem. 293, 13224–13233 (2018).
20. Furuki, T. & Sakurai, M. Group 3 LEA protein model peptides protect
liposomes during desiccation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr.
1838, 2757–2766 (2014).
21. Piszkiewicz, S. et al. Protecting activity of desiccated enzymes.
Protein Sci. 28, 941–951 (2019).
22. Ben Chorin, A. et al. ConSurf-DB: an accessible repository for the
evolutionary conservation patterns of the majority of PDB proteins.
Protein Sci. 29, 258–267 (2020).
23. Patil, R. et al. A ligand-induced structural change in fatty acid-binding
protein 1 is associated with potentiation of peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor α agonists. J. Biol. Chem. 294, 3720–3734 (2019).
24. Young, A. C. et al. Structural studies on human muscle fatty acid
binding protein at 1.4 Å resolution: binding interactions with three C18
fatty acids. Structure 2, 523–534 (1994).
25. Balchin, D., Hayer-Hartl, M. & Hartl, F. U. In vivo aspects of protein
folding and quality control. Science 353, aac4354 (2016).
26. Lim, S., Glover, D. J. & Clark, D. S. Prefoldins in archaea. In Prefoldins:
the New Chaperones, Advances in Experimental Medicine and
Biology Vol. 1106 (ed. Djouder, N.) (Springer, 2018).
27. Hibshman, J. D., Carra, S. & Goldstein, B. Tardigrade small heat shock
proteinscan limitdesiccation-inducedproteinaggregation.Commun.
Biol. 6, 121 (2023).
28. Richaud,M. et al. Ultrastructural analysisof the dehydrated tardigrade
Hypsibius exemplaris unveils an anhydrobiotic-speciﬁc architecture.
Sci. Rep. 10, 4324 (2020).
29. Zvinavashe, A. T. et al. Programmable design of seed coating function
induces water-stress tolerance in semi-arid regions. Nat. Food 2,
485–493 (2021).
30. Heveran,C. M. et al. Biomineralization and successive regeneration of
engineered living building materials. Matter 2, 481–494 (2020).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired
Engineering at Harvard University as the validation project. This work was
further supported by the DARPA under Cooperative Agreement Number
W911NF-19-2-0017. The authors acknowledgethe HarvardMedicalSchool
Electron Microscopy Facility for the use of TEM and the Center for Macro-
molecular Interactions atHarvard MedicalSchoolfor the use ofCDandDLS.
B.M. acknowledges NSF CMMI-1752172 and ONR N000141912317. Z.B.
acknowledges support from the NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
Program.
Author contributions
S.L. designed the research, performed the experiments, analyzed the data,
and wrote the paper. C.B.R. conducted the molecular dynamics simulation
and corresponding analysis. Z.B. and B.M. performed and analyzed the R.
tropici experiments. J.C.W. performed structural analysis, analyzed the data
and wrote the paper. P.A.S. analyzed the data, contributed to experiment
design and edited the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Pamela A. Silver.
Peer review information Communications Biology thanks Yohta Fukuda
and Luis Pacios for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary
Handling Editors: Lei Zheng and Johannes Stortz. A peer review ﬁle is
available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06336-w
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:633 
10
