communications biology
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Telomeric RNA (TERRA) increases in
response to spaceﬂight and high-altitude
climbing
Check for updates
Taghreed M. Al-Turki1,2,9,11, David G. Maranon1,3,11, Christopher B. Nelson1,2,10, Aidan M. Lewis1,2,
Jared J. Luxton1,2, Lynn E. Taylor1, Noelia Altina2,3, Fei Wu
4, Huixun Du4, JangKeun Kim
5,6,
Namita Damle5,6, Eliah Overbey
5,6, Cem Meydan
5,6, Kirill Grigorev5,6, Daniel A. Winer4,
David Furman4,7,8, Christopher E. Mason
5,6
& Susan M. Bailey
1,2
Telomeres are repetitive nucleoprotein complexes at chromosomal termini essential for maintaining
genome stability. Telomeric RNA, or TERRA, is a previously presumed long noncoding RNA of
heterogeneous lengths that contributes to end-capping structure and function, and facilitates
telomeric recombination in tumors that maintain telomere length via the telomerase-independent
Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) pathway. Here, we investigated TERRA in the radiation-
induced DNA damage response (DDR) across astronauts, high-altitude climbers, healthy donors, and
cellular models. Similar to astronautsin the space radiation environment and climbers of Mt. Everest, in
vitro radiation exposure prompted increased transcription of TERRA, while simulated microgravity did
not. Data suggest a speciﬁc TERRA DDR to telomeric double-strand breaks (DSBs), and provide direct
demonstration of hybridized TERRA at telomere-speciﬁc DSB sites, indicative of protective
TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrid formation. Targeted telomeric DSBs also resulted in accumulation of
TERRA foci in G2-phase, supportive of TERRA’s role in facilitating recombination-mediated telomere
elongation. Results have important implications for scenarios involving persistent telomeric DNA
damage, such as those associated with chronic oxidative stress (e.g., aging, systemic inﬂammation,
environmental and occupational radiation exposures), which can trigger transient ALT in normal
human cells, as well as for targeting TERRA as a therapeutic strategy against ALT-positive tumors.
Telomeres are specialized nucleoprotein “caps” at the natural ends of
chromosomes essential for maintaining genome stability. Telomeres face
two major challenges as a result of their physical location: the inability to
replicate to the very end of linear DNA molecules (the end replication
problem)1,2; and circumventing activation of inappropriate DNA damage
responses (DDRs) (the end protection problem)3,4. Mammalian telomeres
are composed of tandem arrays of highly conserved repetitive G-rich
sequence (5’-TTAGGG/CCCTAA-3’)5–7, which in humans range in length
from~5to15 kbandend in3’single-strandedG-richoverhangsof~30–500
nucleotides8,9. The 3’ single-stranded telomeric overhang serves as the
substrate for telomerase, the specialized reverse transcriptase capable of de
novo addition of telomeric repeats onto newly synthesized telomeres10.
1Department of Environmental and Radiological Health Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. 2Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. 3Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. 4Buck AI
Platform, Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA, USA. 5Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 6The
HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine and WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 7Stanford 1000 Immunomes Project, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. 8Instituto de Investigaciones en Medicina
Traslacional (IIMT), Universidad Austral, CONICET, Pilar, Argentina. 9Present address: Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Departments of Micro-
biology and Immunology, and Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.10Present address: Children’s
Medical Research Institute, 214 Hawkesbury Road, Westmead, Sydney, NSW 2145, Australia. 11These authors contributed equally: Taghreed M. Al-Turki, David G.
Maranon.
e-mail: chm2042@med.cornell.edu; Susan.Bailey@colostate.edu
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

Telomeric 3’ overhangs also facilitate formation of protective terminal
structural features termed t-loops11,12. Telomeres are dynamic structures
associatedwithamyriadoftelomere-speciﬁcandnonspeciﬁcproteins,sixof
which comprise the shelterin complex and include the telomere-repeat
binding factors TRF1 and TRF2, which contributes to regulation of telo-
merase activity, t-loop formation, and protection of chromosome ends8,13–15.
Normalhumansomaticcellshaveverylowlevelsoftelomeraseactivity,
and thus telomeres shorten with continued cell division, as well as with
oxidative stress and a variety of lifestyle factors, including chronic stressors
and environmental exposures16–22. Telomere shortening is a key molecular
driver of aging and determinant of age-related degenerative pathologies,
including dementias, cardiovascular disease, and cancer23–25. Telomerase
activity is sufﬁcient to maintain telomere length only in highly proliferative
populations like germ-line and stem cells, and the vast majority of cancers26.
The remaining ~10–15% of human cancers maintain telomere length via
the
telomerase-independent,
recombination-
mediated
Alternative
Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) pathway27–29. ALT tumors display a
number of distinguishing features, including heterogeneous telomere
lengths, increased frequencies of telomere sister chromatid exchange (T-
SCE), ALT-associated PML bodies (APBs), and extrachromosomal telo-
meric repeats (ETCRs)30–32.
Due to their repetitive and heterochromatic nature, telomeres were
long regarded as silent, rather unremarkable regions of the genome.
Therefore, discovery of TElomere Repeat-containing RNA, or TERRA,
propelled the ﬁeld into new areas of research and potential mechanisms of
telomere maintenance33,34. TERRA, a presumed long noncoding RNA
(lncRNA) untilrecently35,rangesinlengthfrom~onehundredto over9000
nucleotides and is transcribed from CpG islands within subtelomeric
regions towards chromosomal termini by RNA Pol II, predominantly using
the C-rich leading-strand as a template and producing 5’-UUAGGG-3’
transcripts33,36,37. TERRA is thought to accumulate preferentially at short
telomeres, where it contributes to end-capping structure and function via
regulation of telomere length and maintenance of genome stability38–40.
TERRA can also indirectly associate with telomeres via shelterin
proteins41,42, as well as interact with an array of RNA binding proteins,
including heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (hnRNPA1)43,44. In
telomerase-positive human cells, TERRA is primarily chromatin-associated
(bound) and not polyadenylated (polyA-), while “free” (unbound) TERRA
is polyadenylated at its 3’-end (polyA+) and represents ~7% of total
TERRA33,36.
TERRA can associate with telomeric DNA to generate classic R-loops,
which are formed by the annealing of nascent TERRA “in-cis” to the
complementary C-rich telomere strand when it fails to be released and
remains bound as a 3-stranded structure, with the G-rich telomere strand
displaced and forming G-quadruplex (G4) DNA structures. There is also
evidence that 3-stranded telomeric R-loops can be formed by a
recombinational-like mechanism, in which TERRA invades a telomeric
duplex “in-trans”45. In either case, and similar to t-loops46, TERRA tran-
scription and telomeric R-loops represent sources of replication stress and
DNA damage speciﬁcally within telomeres47,48. A different TERRA-based
structureoccursviathedirectbindingofTERRAtoaC-richsingle-stranded
telomere tract forming a 2-stranded TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrid. Telo-
meric R-loops and TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrids promote homology-
directed repair at telomeres and are common in ALT cells, likely due to an
abundance of TERRA38. One of the hallmarks of ALT is loss of function of
the chromatin remodeling complex ATRX/DAXX [α-thalassemia/mental
retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX) and its physical partner death
domain-associated protein (DAXX)]49, which results in decompaction of
telomeric chromatin50, thereby facilitating increased transcription and ele-
vated levels of TERRA in ALT cells compared to normal cells or telomerase
positive tumors with functional ATRX/DAXX51,52. Indeed, signiﬁcantly
increasedfrequenciesoftelomericDNA:RNAhybridswerefoundinhuman
U2OS ALT (osteosarcoma) cells compared to HeLa telomerase positive
(cervical carcinoma) cells. Furthermore, removal of telomere-bound
TERRA in ALT cells via overexpression of the endogenous RNA
endonuclease RnaseH1 resulted in telomere shortening. Together, these
results support critical roles for TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrids in telomere
protection and recombination-mediated elongation in ALT cells38. Inter-
estingly, TERRA has also been implicated in telomere mobility, a capability
that would facilitate the physical telomere-telomere interaction required for
recombination events to occur38,53.
Such an “end-view” of TERRA is consistent with strict inhibition of
DDRs at telomeres, which prevents spurious end-joining and genomic
instability54,55, but also renders telomeres refractory to repair when damage
does occur within and/or near telomeric regions; e.g., telomeric regions are
especially susceptible to oxidative damage due to their G-rich makeup56,57.
Telomere site-speciﬁc endonucleases have been developed and employed to
address the question of how, and even whether, double-strand breaks
(DSBs) within telomeres are repaired58–60. We previously utilized transient
transfection of the well-characterized endonuclease TRAS1-EN fused to
TRF1(EN-T)targetingsystem61,62inhumanBJ1-hTERTapparentlynormal
ﬁbroblasts, as well as in EJ-30 telomerase positive and U2OS (ALT) cancer
cells, to evaluate telomeric DSBs speciﬁcally in G1-phase of the cell cycle63.
Telomeredysfunction-inducedfoci(TIFs)providedavaluablebiomarkerof
broken telomeres, as they represent co-localization of the well-established
DSB marker gamma (γ)-H2AX at telomeres64. Importantly, induction of
telomere-speciﬁc DSBs resulted in extensive tracks of resected 5’ C-rich
single-stranded telomeric DNA in all cell lines (independent of telomerase
status), a previously proposed biomarker of the recombination dependent
ALT pathway65,66. We posited that such highly reactive and exposed DNA
“ends” were protected by binding complementary TERRA and forming
telomeric DNA:RNA hybrids, so that they might persist into S/G2 for
recombination-mediated elongation as a means of repair. Here, to better
understandtheroleoftelomericRNAinthetelomericDDR,weinvestigated
TERRA associated with ionizing radiation- and telomere speciﬁc-induced
damage in normal human blood in vivo (during spaceﬂight and high-
altitude ascent of Mt. Everest), and in human U2OS (ALT) cells in vitro.
Results
Telomeres and TERRA in the space radiation DNA damage
response
We previously documented telomere length dynamics (changes over time)
in astronauts experiencing long-duration spaceﬂight in low Earth orbit
(LEO) onboard the International Space Station (ISS)22,67,68. Contrary to
expectation based on in vitro studies and acute radiation exposures69,70, and
similar to our results for NASA’s One Year Mission twin astronaut67, which
were validated with long-read, single-molecule nanopore sequencing7,22,
signiﬁcantly longer telomeres (in blood) were observed during spaceﬂight
(compared to pre-ﬂight, baseline measures) in two unrelated 6-month
mission astronauts. Furthermore, telomere length shortened rapidly upon
return to Earth and, overall, average telomere length tended to be shorter
after spaceﬂight than before for all crewmembers in our combined studies.
Similarly, for the 2021 SpaceX Inspiration4 all civilian crew, telomere
elongation (in blood) was observed in all 4 crewmembers during the 3-day,
high-elevation (590 km) orbital mission71,72. Consistent with our previous
studies of astronauts living and working in the space radiation
environment22,73, stress-related responses to oxidative stress, mitochondrial
dysregulation, inﬂammation, and DNA damage were also enriched during
the
Inspiration4
mission
and
correlated
with
telomere
length
dynamics71,74–76, thus supporting this phenotype as a consistent human
response to spaceﬂight that is thus far independent of mission duration
(3 days, 6 months, 1 year). Moreover, our previous cell-by-cell cytogenetic
observations of ALT/ALT-like phenotypes during spaceﬂight (hetero-
geneous telomere lengths; very long and very short)22, as well as pathway
analyses that implicated ALT and recombination-based maintenance of
telomeres in two high altitude climbers – who also experienced telomere
elongation associated with climbing Mt. Everest68, supported our overall
supposition that due to telomeres’ particular susceptibility to oxidative
damage, the ALT pathway of telomere maintenance may be transiently
activated in normal cells during chronic exposure22. We have reported
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
2

individual differences in response68, as well as provided support for the
mechanistic role of radiation exposure underlying changes in telomere
length dynamics and persistent DDRs; speciﬁcally, telomere elongation (in
blood) was observed in a cohort of 15 prostate cancer patients immediately
following three months of radiation therapy (IMRT)77,78.
Given these results, and the emerging roles of telomeric RNA in
maintaining genome stability, which include involvement in DNA damage
and cellular stress responses39, we next interrogated whether TERRA might
play a role in a low dose/low dose-rate space radiation-induced DDR.
Indeed, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data provided evidence of signiﬁcant
increases in the abundance of TERRA transcripts (q-value < 0.05, FDR
corrected) duringboth longand short-durationspaceﬂight;i.e.,forthe One-
Year mission astronaut (Twins Study)67, and the Inspiration4 crewmembers
(Fig. 1). Telomeric repeat sequence variants beyond the canonical 5’-
TTAGGG-3’ have been previously reported and conﬁrmed by a variety of
approaches, including our telomere long- and short-read DNA sequencing
as part of the NASA Twins Study7. Correspondingly, TERRA molecules
have been shown to contain frequent variations in the sequence runs of
perfect 5’-UUAGGG-3’ repeats79, which were used here to validate TERRA
transcripts in both sequencing-by-synthesis chemistry (Illumina) and direct
RNA-sequencing (Oxford Nanopore) platforms (short-read bulk RNA-seq,
long-read direct RNA, and single-cell RNA-seq). In reads containing the
telomericRNA/TERRAcanonicalmotif,5’-UUAGGG-3’,theabundanceof
multiple motif variants increased signiﬁcantly (Mann–Whitney U test,
adjusted p-value < 0.05) compared to baseline (pre-ﬂight and twin ground
control samples) in both experiments during and immediately following
space ﬂight (Supplementary Data 1, 2); among the top ten correlating
variants, Pearson’s r was between 0.87 and 0.94 for the Inspiration4 crew-
members, and at 0.99 for the Twins Study subjects. As such, these motifs
displayed concerted signiﬁcant enrichment during space ﬂight (Twins
Study), and immediately post-ﬂight (Inspiration4, R + 1 day), returning to
baseline levels over the course of recovery (Fig. 1).
In sharp contrast, ground-based simulated microgravity alone did not
lead to an increased abundance of TERRA 5’-UUAGGG-3’ motifs and its
variants (Mann–Whitney U p-value = 0.21) (Supplementary Fig. 1; Sup-
plementary Data 3). For these in vitro experiments, and to isolate the par-
ticular effect of microgravity, normal human PBMCs from two healthy
donors were loaded into a rotating wall vessel (rotary cell culture system)
and rotated for 25 h to simulate microgravity, and then RNA-seq was
performed on test and control cultures80. Notably, TERRA transcripts
associated withsimulated microgravitywerenotsigniﬁcantlyincreased,and
actually even decreased in likelihood. Furthermore, the abundance of
TERRA-associated sequence motifs was elevated for climbers while at high
altitudes (from 1400to 5600—6400 m above sea level), and then returned to
baseline levels shortly after descent (Fig. 2, Supplementary Data 4). Thus, in
addition to telomere elongation and evidence of ALT-like activity in the
ground-based climbers during a 5-day expedition ascending Mt Everest68,
TERRA transcripts were signiﬁcantly enriched in vivo in a high-altitude,
higher-radiation environment, independent of microgravity.
TERRA in the DNA damage response to ionizing
radiation-induced DSBs
To evaluate whether TERRA might be involved in a general radiation
response, another major stressor associated with spaceﬂight (and high
altitudes),cyclinghumanU2OS (ALT) cellswithhighlevelsof TERRAwere
exposed to ionizing radiation (IR), a DNA damaging agent and potent
inducer of prompt DSBs throughout the genome; speciﬁcally, cells were
exposed to γ-rays (2 Gy), or sham-irradiated (0 Gy), and incubated for 4 h.
High-resolution three-dimensional (3-D) cell-by-cell image analyses and
quantiﬁcation81 of TERRA signals in individual interphase nuclei following
RNA ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (RNA-FISH) revealed a signiﬁcant
increase in the mean number of TERRA foci/cell in irradiated cells com-
pared to unirradiated controls (p ≤0.0001) (Fig. 3a). To validate and con-
ﬁrm that signals were indeed TERRA, irradiated and unirradiated U2OS
cells were treated with RNaseA, which degrades free RNA, and although
reduced,TERRAsignals remained.Therefore,forallexperiments,cells were
treated with a combination of RNaseA+H to remove both bound
(DNA:RNA hybrids) and unbound (free) TERRA82, which signiﬁcantly
reduced the number of TERRA foci observed (p < 0.01; Supplementary
Fig. 2a, Supplementary Data 5). Resistant (remaining) TERRA foci fol-
lowing RNaseA+H treatment likely represent TERRA nested in unwinding
RNA G4 structures83. These results provide orthogonal validation that
TERRA abundance increases in response to acute IR exposure and genome-
wide induction of DSBs.
To conﬁrm that TERRA induction following in vitro IR exposure was
due to increased transcription, consistent with the increased levels of
TERRA transcripts observed in vivo (during spaceﬂight and high-altitude
climb) (Figs. 1 and 2), global transcription was inhibited via treatment with
b
a
Fig. 1 | Telomeric RNA (TERRA) sequence motif abundance increases in
response to spaceﬂight. Relative abundances of motifs highly correlating to the
canonical TERRA motif 5´-UUAGGG-3´ in RNA-Seq data. a Data from the SpaceX
Inspiration4 mission for the four civilian astronauts (C001–C004). b Data from the
NASA Twins Study for the one-year mission astronaut (TW) and his identical twin
ground control (HR). Triangular matrices display pairwise Mann–Whitney U test
p-values (FDR-adjusted) for comparisons between the groups, with each box con-
taining a p-value connecting to the groups in the comparison; signiﬁcance (p < 0.05)
is indicated in red (Supplementary Data 1, 2). “L−“ indicates timepoints measured
in days prior to launch, “FD” days during spaceﬂight, and “R+“ in days after return
to Earth; preﬁx “GD” replaces these preﬁxes for the ground control subject. “Space
effect” is a collective term for in-ﬂight timepoints (FD122–334, Twins Study) and
immediate post-ﬂight timepoints (R+1, Inspiration4). Simulated microgravity did
not result in similar increases in TERRA transcripts (Supplementary Fig. 1; Sup-
plementary Data 3).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
3

Actinomycin-D(ActD;10 ug/ml,dilutedinDMSO)for3,6,8,and24 h,and
then RNA decay measured using digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) to assess
absolute change in expression of two housekeeping control genes (GAPDH
and 18S rRNA), as per previous reports33,34,43,84 (Fig. 3a, Supplementary
Fig. 2b). The timepoint for maximum reduction (% expression) was
established at 3–8 h ActD treatment (53.2% vs. 39.8% and 37.4% at 8 and
24 h, respectively), therefore U2OS cells were treated with ActD (or DMSO
for controls) for 3 and 8 h prior to radiation exposure (2 Gy) or sham-
irradiation (0 Gy), and then ﬁxed 4 h later for RNA-FISH. Quantiﬁcation of
TERRA signals (as above) demonstrated that inhibition of transcription
prior to IR exposure prevented TERRA induction; i.e., cells treated with
ActD did not show a radiation-induced increase of TERRA foci above
background levels (Fig. 3a). Taken together, these results support upregu-
lation of TERRA transcription, speciﬁcally in response to IR-induced DNA
damage/DSBs, as inhibition of transcription following IR exposure pre-
vented induction of increased numbers of TERRA foci.
Telomere-speciﬁc DSBs induced by the EN-T targeting system
Due to the random distribution of DSBs induced by sparsely ionizing
radiations, γ-rays would only rarely be expected to directly damage telo-
meresduetothesmallfractionofthegenomethattheyoccupy.Therefore,to
explore the response of TERRA speciﬁcally to DSBs that occur within tel-
omeres, we employed the chimeric TRAS1-EN endonuclease fused to TRF1
(EN-T) targeting system61,62 in human U2OS (ALT) cells. We previously
demonstrated the utility of this well-characterized system for inducing
telomeric DSBs in human normal and cancer cell lines63. Here, populations
of cycling U2OS cells were transiently transfected with EN-T, TRF1-only
(positive control), or empty vector (EV, transfection control), and then
compared to untransfected (UT) negative control populations.
To accurately assess DSB induction speciﬁcally within telomeres, we
ﬁrst evaluated transfection efﬁciencies by co-staining for FLAG (to detect
EN-T or TRF1-only) and DAPI (to deﬁne nuclear DNA/cell periphery)
(Supplementary Fig. 3a). To eliminate any background signals, only cells
with≥20FLAGfoci/cellwereconsideredpositivelytransfected(~25–30%of
the cells) and subsequently scored by the Cell-Proﬁler software, i.e., all cells
scored were transfected (100%). As expected, the mean number of FLAG
foci/cell was signiﬁcantly higher in EN-T and TRF1-only transfected
populations compared to empty vector and untransfected cells (p < 0.001),
which represented an ~4-fold increase (Supplementary Fig. 3b; Supple-
mentary Data 5). Additionally, the mean number of FLAG foci/cell for EN-
T and TRF1-only transfected populations did not signiﬁcantly differ, sug-
gesting similar levels of transfection for EN-T and TRF1-only.
To validate EN-T induction of telomere-speciﬁc DSBs, positively-
transfectedU2OScells(FLAG+) were subjected tonative (non-denaturing)
telomere FISH (to detect resected single-stranded telomeric DNA) together
with γ-H2AX immunoﬂuorescence (to detect DNA DSBs)85, which served
Fig. 2 | Telomeric RNA (TERRA) sequence motif abundance increases in Earth-
based high-altitude climbers of Mt. Everest. Relative abundances of motifs highly
correlating to the canonical TERRA motif 5´-UUAGGG-3´ in RNA-Seq data from a
longitudinal study of two male climbers of Mt. Everest (1, 2) who experienced
telomere elongation and evidence of ALT-like activity during the expedition. Tri-
angular matrices display pairwise Mann–Whitney U test p-values (FDR-adjusted)
for comparisons between the groups, with each box containing a p-value connecting
to the groups in the comparison; signiﬁcance (p < 0.05) is indicated in red (Sup-
plementary Data 4). Results demonstrate TERRA overexpression at high altitudes
(EB, CII) compared to lower altitudes (CO, NP) in this somewhat similar stressful
and high-altitude extreme environment, independent of microgravity.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
4

to identify telomere-speciﬁc DSBs as evidenced by triple co-localization of
FLAG, γ-H2AX, and telomere (TTAGGG) foci (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Both EN-T and TRF1-only co-localized to telomeres and induced telomeric
DSBs to similar levels (FLAG-γH2AX-telomere co-localized foci), con-
ﬁrming EN-T induction of targeted telomeric DSBs. That TRF1-only also
recruited γ-H2AX to telomeric damage sites is consistent with previous
reports86,87 and the recent demonstration that overexpression of wild-type
TRF1, and not mutated TRF1, in U2OS ALT cells resulted in a 3-fold
increase in telomeric γ-H2AX foci at 48hr88. Telomeric DSBs were not
observed in cells transfected with empty vector or in untransfected popu-
lations (FLAG-), and as expected there was no signiﬁcant effect of
RNaseA+H treatment (Supplementary Data 5). When the data was eval-
uated as percent co-localization (Supplementary Fig. 4b), FLAG-γH2AX-
telomere foci co-localized at most telomeres in EN-T and TRF1-only
transfected cells (>80% were damaged), and all detectable γ-H2AX was
localized to telomeres. Thus, our approach utilizing the EN-T system
facilitated evaluation of telomeric DNA damage/DSBs only in transfected
cells (inclusion of non-transfected cells was avoided), and results conﬁrmed
the efﬁciency of EN-T and TRF1-only in inducing DSBs speciﬁcally at
telomeres in U2OS ALT cells.
TERRA response and recruitment to telomeric DSB sites
To test the hypothesis that TERRA may respond speciﬁcally to telomeric
DSB damage sites, TERRA foci were quantiﬁed using cell-by-cell 3-D image
analysis of RNA-FISH in transfected and untransfected U2OS cell popu-
lations. To evaluate and visualize TERRA response to telomeric DSB
damage sites, we quantiﬁed triple co-localization of FLAG, TERRA, and
telomere (TRF2) foci (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 5a). Signiﬁcant increases
in the mean number of TERRA foci co-localized at telomeric DSB sites
(p < 0.0001)were observedinEN-T and TRF1-only transfected populations
compared to empty vector and untransfected controls; RNaseA+H
treatment removed TERRA signal from all populations (Supplementary
Data 5). Furthermore, there was a corresponding decrease in the mean
number of undamaged telomeres bound by TERRA in EN-T and TRF1-
only transfected cells compared to the steady-state/background levels of
undamaged telomeres in empty vector and untransfected populations
(Telomere-TERRA co-localized foci). These results provide direct
evidence of signiﬁcantly increased levels of hybridized TERRA speciﬁcally
at telomeric DSB damage sites, consistent with the transcription-dependent
nature of elevated TERRA foci and formation of TERRA:telomeric
DNA hybrids in response to broken telomeres; i.e., TERRA binds extensive
tracks of resected 5’ single-stranded C-rich telomeric DNA at DSB
break sites63.
We further examined TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrid dynamics by
estimating percentages of bound (hybridized) and unbound (free) TERRA
(Supplementary Fig. 5b; Supplementary Data 5). Total TERRA foci in
positively transfected EN-T and TRF1-only cells (>20 FLAG foci) with
damaged telomeres (FLAG-TERRA-TRF2 foci) were compared to empty
vector and untransfected populations with few or no damaged telomeres
(TERRA-TRF2 foci). Free TERRA was determined by subtracting hybri-
dized from total TERRA. A striking shift in TERRA distribution occurred in
EN-T and TRF1-only transfected populations compared to the controls
(empty vector and untransfected). EN-T and TRF1-only transfected cells
with damaged telomeres had ~90% of TERRA bound to telomeres, and only
~10% of the total TERRA was free. In control populations, the opposite
trend was observed; only ~30% of TERRA was bound to telomeres, while
~70% was free, similar to previous reports in telomerase positive cells36,44.
Results indicate that in contrast to typically stable localization of TERRA at
telomeres in U2OS ALT cells51, upon induction of telomeric DSBs free
TERRA is recruited to damage sites, as the fraction of bound TERRA sig-
niﬁcantly increased while freeTERRA dramaticallydecreased,reﬂectiveof a
potentially rapid and robust response to telomeric DSBs.
Fig. 3 | Transcription-dependent TERRA foci increase in response to IR-induced
DNA damage/DSBs. a Human U2OS cell populations were exposed to γ-rays
(2 Gy) or sham-irradiated (0 Gy) and TERRA foci/cell quantiﬁed using 3-D image
analyses following RNA-FISH. Quantiﬁcation of the mean number of TERRA foci/
cell revealed a signiﬁcant increase post IR exposure (4 h) compared to unirradiated
controls (DMSO). Inhibition of transcription via treatment with ActD for 3 and 8 h
prior to IR exposure prevented the radiation-induced increase of TERRA foci. Error
bars are SEM. Signiﬁcance was assessed by two-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s
multiple comparison test. ****p < 0.0001. b TERRA colocalizes at telomere-speciﬁc
DSBs. Human U2OS cell populations were transiently transfected with EN-T, TRF1-
only (positive control), empty vector (EV), or they remained untransfected (UT).
Quantiﬁcation of mean number of colocalized foci/cell: Telomere (TRF2)-TERRA
foci represent TERRA at undamaged telomeres (background); Telomere-FLAG foci
represent transfected/damaged telomeres without TERRA; and Telomere-FLAG-
TERRA foci representcolocalization of TERRA at damaged telomeres. Error bars are
SEM. Signiﬁcance was assessed by two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparison test. ****p < 0.0001, ns not statistically signiﬁcant. See Supplementary
Data 5 for all comparison statistics.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
5

Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that in addition to newly tran-
scribed, nascent TERRA being retained at extensively resected 5’ C-rich
single-stranded telomeric DNA at telomeric DSB damage sites, readily-
available, free TERRA is also recruited to telomeric DSB sites, with both
forming protective telomeric DNA:RNA hybrids41,63.
TERRA accumulates at telomeric-DSBs in G2 ALT cells
To further investigate TERRA in the DDR to telomeric DSBs, and con-
sidering that U2OS cells experience a permissive G1 checkpoint89, and that
both RAD51 and RAD52 have been implicated in TERRA interactions at
telomeres40,90, we hypothesized a requisite cell-cycle dependent component
of TERRA’s role at telomeric DSBs if involved in facilitating recombination-
mediated elongation as a means of repair. As per our previous report63, a
stablytransfected U2OScelllineexpressingGemininproteinfused to Green
Fluorescence Protein (Geminin-GFP)91 was created to positively identify
individual interphase nuclei in G2-phase; absence of Geminin-GFP signals
in each negative (unlabeled) cell represented a cell in G1-phase. To identify
nuclei in S-phase, cells were pulse-labeled with EdU for 30 min. Thus, cells
positive for Germinin-GFP were in G2, cells positive for EdU were in S, and
cells negative for both markers were in G1 (Supplementary Fig. 6a).
Cell cycle distributions were thereby determined in transfected
populations and compared to untransfected controls, in which there was no
signiﬁcant difference between the mean number or percent of cells in G1
and G2 (Supplementary Fig. 6b). In contrast, transiently transfected EN-T,
TRF1-only, and empty vector cells accumulated in G2-phase, consistent
with a DNA damage-induced G2 block, irrespective of whether DNA
damage was telomere-speciﬁc DSBs (EN-T, TRF1-only; Fig. 3b) or other
more general DNA damage related to the cellular stress and toxicity of
transfection (empty vector)92. Indeed, there were signiﬁcantly more cells in
G2 compared to G1 in each of the transfected populations (p < 0.005;
Supplementary Data 5), as well as a corresponding decrease of cells in G1.
Consistent with expectation, cell cycle distributions were not signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by RNaseA+H treatment (Supplementary Data 5).
Next, we quantiﬁed TERRA abundance throughout the cell cycle,
which mirrored the cell cycle distributions in that there was no signiﬁcant
difference between the mean number of TERRA foci in G1 and G2 cells in
untransfected controlpopulations, while in transfectedpopulations TERRA
foci increased in G2 and correspondingly decreased in G1 (Supplementary
Fig. 7). Signiﬁcant increases in the mean number of TERRA foci in G2
compared to G1-phase occurred in each of the transfected populations
(p < 0.0001; Supplementary Data 5). These results further support free
TERRA being recruited to telomere-speciﬁc DSBs (EN-T, TRF1-only) and
demonstrate TERRA accumulation in G2-phase, concomitant with a DNA
damage-induced G2 block (Supplementary Fig. 6b). TERRA was also ele-
vated in response to the cellular stress of transfection (empty vector), but
these TERRA foci were not associated with telomeric DSBs since they did
not colocalize with γ-H2AX at telomeres (Fig. 3b), a ﬁnding consistent with
previous reports demonstrating crosstalk between cellular stress and
TERRA induction [reviewed in ref. 39]. Lastly, and as expected, TERRA foci
were eliminated by RNaseA+H treatment (Supplementary Data 5).
Discussion
In light of TERRA’s emerging roles in DNA damage and cellular stress
responses39, we speculated that TERRA might play a role in ionizing
radiation and/or telomeric DDRs. To test this, we investigated telomeric
RNA, or TERRA, levels in astronauts experiencing the low dose/low dose-
rate space radiation environment and in ground-based high-altitude clim-
bers of Mt. Everest (normal human blood in vivo), as well as in normal
human PBMCs exposed to simulated microgravity, and in human U2OS
(ALT) cells utilizing in vitro radiation exposures and the chimeric EN-T
telomeric DSB targeting system62,63,68.
As part of the NASA Twins Study, we pioneered a variety of
spaceﬂight-speciﬁc approaches for overcoming the unique challenges
associated with obtaining astronaut/human in vivo samples for modern
“omics”-based and molecular analyses. Here, transcriptomics revealed an
increased abundance of TERRA transcripts in bulk cDNA, single-cell
cDNA, and direct RNAseq data, during both long (One Year) and short-
duration (3-day) spaceﬂight as compared to pre-ﬂight ground controls. The
presence of variants of the canonical TERRA motif (5’-UUAGGG-3’) in the
telomericRNAlikelyrepresentthecontributionofpreviouslyreportednon-
canonical telomeric motifs7, and motifs with high levels of correlation to 5’-
UUAGGG-3’ served as proxies for detection of TERRA. This was particu-
larly evident in the case of our Twins Study data, where the top ten motifs
correlated nearly perfectly (Pearson’s r = 0.99). We note that the counts of
shorter k-mers may be partially contributed to by the counts of longer k-
mers (such as UUAGGG explaining UUAGG). However, these motifs are
often subsets of sequence, and the results are signiﬁcant per-motif or across
allsequences.Thelowervaluesof rintheInspiration4data maybethe result
of higher levels of RNA degradation or the shorter mission duration –
nevertheless, these data also showed that all top motifs were signiﬁcantly
enriched following spaceﬂight, consistent with the higher levels of TERRA
detected by the plurality of methods employed. It is also worth noting the
much higher radiation dose-rate for the Inspiration4 high-elevation orbital
mission (1.57 mSv/day) vs. the One Year Mission in LEO for the NASA
Twins Study (0.42 mSv/day), potentially suggestive of a dose response in
terms of TERRA expression71,93, and an important avenue of investigation
for future missions.
Mechanistically insightful was the observation that simulated micro-
gravity alone did not induce similar increases in TERRA abundance.
Although terrestrial analogs like rotating wall vessels or random positioning
machines may not precisely replicate microgravity conditions in space, they
are often used for such purposes as a proxy94, since they are the only rea-
sonable or available option, and they facilitate testing the isolated effect of
thissinglestressor.OurﬁndingofelevatedabundanceofTERRAtranscripts
in the Earth-bound high-altitude climbers of Mt Everest in vivo, who also
experienced telomere elongation and evidence of ALT-like activity in this
somewhat similar stressful and higher-radiation environment68, further
supports this conclusion. Also relevant in this regard is that radiation dose
rates from more damaging cosmic radiations increase with altitude, and
doses per Everest expedition are in the range of 1 mSv [International
Radiation Protection Association].
Given the intriguing human in vivo evidence, we pursued in vitro
studies to characterize the response and investigate whether TERRA might
be involved in a general DNA damage response to IR-induced DSBs. Human
U2OS ALT cells were utilized due to their high levels of TERRA, as well as
the indications of ALT/ALT-like activity observed during spaceﬂight and the
high-altitude ascent of Mt. Everest68,95. Transcription-dependent increases in
the numbers of TERRA foci were observed in irradiated populations
(compared to non-irradiated controls), consistent with previous reports of
upregulation of TERRA following treatment with the chemotherapeutic and
radiomimetic drug bleomycin96, as well as with increased TERRA tran-
scription upon treatment with etoposide, a topoisomerase II inhibitor that
induces DSBs97. Because all of these DNA damaging agents induce DSBs
randomly throughout the genome, we next queried whether TERRA might
be responding speciﬁcally to DSBs within telomeres themselves.
Toaddressthispossibility,weemployedtheEN-Ttargetingsystemdue
to its effective induction of telomere-speciﬁc DSBs as opposed to single-
strand damage, such as that induced by reactive oxygen species62,90, an
important consideration since oxidative stress is also associated with IR
exposure and has been shown to increase TERRA levels in normal cells98,99.
Telomere-speciﬁc DSBs induced by EN-T and TRF1-only (positive control
in U2OS ALT cells) were conﬁrmed via triple co-localization of FLAG-
γH2AX-telomerefoci,eventsnotobservedwithempty-vectortransfectedor
untransfected populations. Importantly, hybridized TERRA was directly
visualized speciﬁcally at telomeric DSB damage sites, as evidenced by triple
co-localization of FLAG-TERRA-TRF2 foci. Furthermore, a striking
redistribution of abundant and “free” (unbound) TERRA to hybridized
(bound) TERRA occurred in response to induction of telomere-speciﬁc
DSBs, supportive evidence of TERRA:telomeric DNA hybrid formation at
break sites.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
6

Bearing in mind that U2OS cells experience a defective G1 checkpoint
due to truncated WIP1 (wild-type p53-induced phosphatase 1) and p16
deﬁciency (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor)89, and further that the HR
proteins RAD51 and RAD52 have been shown to be required for TERRA
interactions at telomeres40,88, we employed a Geminin-GFP/EdU based
strategy as per our previous63 to determine cell cycle proﬁles of interphase
nuclei experiencing telomeric DSBs. Positively transfected EN-T and TRF1-
only cells accumulated in G2-phase, consistent with a DNA damage/telo-
meric DSB-induced G2 block. U2OS cell populations transfected with
empty vector also accumulated in G2, reﬂective of transfection-induced
toxicity, cellular stress, and/or more general DNA damage92. Notably, cell
cycle distributions of TERRA foci showed parallel dynamics, in that con-
comitant enrichment of TERRA foci in G2 was observed in all three
transfected populations. Since TERRA responded not only to telomere-
speciﬁcDNA/DSBdamage(EN-T,TRF1-only),butalsotothecellularstress
of transfection (empty vector), our data is consistent with previous reports
demonstrating crosstalk between cellular stress and TERRA induction
[reviewed in ref. 39]. Results are also consistent with TERRA foci in empty
vector populations not being associated with telomere-speciﬁc DSBs/bro-
ken telomeres because they did not colocalize with γ-H2AX at telomeres.
Telomeres’ particular susceptibility to oxidative stress-related base damage
likely contributes to TERRA’s response, whether associated with IR or
cellular stress, and especially when exposure is chronic in nature68.
Taken together, these results support a telomere-speciﬁc DDR in the
space radiation environment whereby TERRA transcription is triggered
upon telomeric damage resulting from chronic oxidative stress and on-
going damage to telomeres, which includes DSB induction and “broken”
telomeres93. Nascent TERRA is then retained at, and readily-available free
(unbound) TERRA is recruited to telomeric DSB damage sites, where it
binds extensive tracks of resected single-stranded 5’ C-rich telomeric
DNA63. Consistent with recent ﬁndings100, as well as our direct visualization
of hybridized TERRA at telomeric DSB damage sites, such recruitment and
redistribution of TERRA results in protective TERRA:telomeric DNA
hybrids that serve to prevent further resection at damaged/broken telo-
meres, as well as facilitate RNA-templated repair101,102 via homologous
recombination-dependent elongation in G2 as a means of restoring func-
tional telomeres.
In addition to providing a template for HR-directed repair of broken
telomeres in cycling cells, and thereby potentially facilitating transient
induction of ALT/ALT-like phenotypes in normal cells and contributing to
changes in telomere length dynamics (very long and very short telomeres),
we speculate that TERRA may also facilitate such repair, e.g., via increased
mobility and/or serving as a scaffold for recruitment of required repair
machinery103. The relevance of these ﬁndings is further highlighted by our
recentdemonstrationthattelomeredysfunctioncanstimulate translationof
TERRA into two novel telomeric dipeptide repeat signaling proteins with
the potential of inducing genomic instability and inﬂammation, intriguing
results that also challenge the presumed “non-coding” nature of
TERRA35,104.
Thus,resultsofferimportantmechanisticinsight thatcan beintegrated
into future studies with the ultimate goal of informing and improving
aerospace precision medicine approaches for astronauts. Results also have
important implications for adverse health effects related to persistent telo-
meric DNAdamage, such as those associated with chronic oxidative stress –
both on the off the planet; e.g., systemic chronic inﬂammatory responses105,
advancing age106, and low dose, low dose-rate environmental or occupa-
tional radiation exposures68. Elevated radiation and oxidative stress were
associated with both long- and short-duration spaceﬂight and high-altitude
climbing, and chronic exposure is capable of transiently activating the ALT
pathway of telomere maintenance via recombination in normal human
cells, evidence of which was observed during spaceﬂight, as well as in the
somewhat similar high-altitude extreme environment of climbing Mt.
Everest22,68. Moreover, and consistent with recent evidence that increased
TERRA transcription and associated ALT-like mechanisms pose a threat to
telomere integrity so must be properly controlled in normal cells107, our
results also support the possibility of targeting telomeric RNA/TERRA-
mediated protection and repair of damaged telomeres associated with high
dose radiation therapy78 as a promising therapeutic strategy against ALT-
positive cancers.
Methods
RNA-Seq for astronauts
Sample collection methods for the four SpaceX Inspiration4 civilian crew-
members have been detailed in full71,108. Brieﬂy, human peripheral blood
mononuclearcells(PBMCs) were isolated fromK2EDTAtubesusingFicoll
separation. Single-nuclei libraries were generated via the Chromium Next
GEMSingleCellMultiomeATACandGeneExpressionkit(10xGenomics)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the NASA Twins Study
subjects, sample collection (and unavoidable loss of some samples), and
poly(A) + RNA preparation was as described in Garrett-Bakelman et al. 67,
and for the high-altitude climbers as in Luxton et al. 68.
Simulated microgravity experiments
De-identiﬁed peripheral blood buffy coat samples were obtained from 2
healthy human donors between the ages of 25 and 36 from the Stanford
University Blood Center (IRB eProtocol# 13942). PBMCs were isolated
using a Ficoll gradient method. Cells were counted and re-suspended in
complete media at 1 × 106 cells/ml (RPMI 1640, 10% Fetal Bovine Serum,
2mM L-Glutamine, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 0.1 mM non-essential
Amino acid, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 50 uM 2-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM
HEPES). The cell suspension of PBMCs was loaded into 10 ml disposable
rotating wall vessels (Synthecon, Houston, TX) and rotated at 15 rpm for
25 hr to generate simulated microgravity. For the 1 G control, the cell sus-
pension was plated in standard 6-well culture plates. 1 G and simulated
microgravity cultures were simultaneously placed in the same 37 °C,
5% CO2 incubator.
For single-cell RNA sequencing, 1 × 104 PBMCs from each condition
were counted and loaded on the 10X Genomics Chromium Controller, and
the libraries were prepared using Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’
Reagent Kit v2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol (10X Genomics,
Pleasanton, CA). The quality of libraries was assessed using Agilent
TapeStation 4200, and test-sequenced on Illumina NextSeq 550. The full
sequencing was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 by SeqMatic
(Fremont, CA). FASTQ (raw data) ﬁles were processed through 10x
Genomics Cell Ranger v6.1.2 pipeline and all bases with quality below Q20
were truncated. The “cellranger count” function was used to perform
transcriptome alignment, ﬁltering, and UMI counting, and then to generate
the count matrixes. Alignment was done against the human genome
GRCh38-2020-A.
In vitro ionizing radiation experiments
U2OS cells were seeded into 4-well chamber slides (Nunc Lab-Tek II
154526) at a density of 5×105 cells/well and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2
to allow cell attachment. Cells were either sham-irradiated (0 Gy) or
exposed to 137Cs γ-rays (2 Gy) while rotating in a Mark I irradiator (J.L
Sheppard) located at Colorado State University. Cells were then returned to
the incubator for 4 hours prior to ﬁxation.
For inhibition of transcription and droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)
analyses, U2OS cells were seeded into 6-well plates (2 × 105 cells/well) 24 h
prior to addition of 10 ug/ml Actinomycin-D (ActD; ThermoFisher). Cells
were collected in Trizol at 3, 6, 8 and 24 hr after treatment. Control U2OS
cells (DMSO treated) were collected after 24 h. RNA (500 ng) was used to
make cDNA using standard reverse transcription (ImPromII-Reverse
Transcription System-Promega). 25 µL reaction mixtures containing
GAPDH or 18S rRNA primers, template (1:10,000 dilution cDNA) and
QX200™ddPCR™EvaGreen Supermix (Bio-Rad: 186–4034) were used for
the ddPCR platform (QX200 Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR™) System – Bio-
Rad). Droplet generation and transfer of emulsiﬁed samples to PCR plates
was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (Instruction
Manual, QX200™Droplet Generator – Bio-Rad). The cycling protocol for
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
7

the ddPCR platform started with a 95 °C enzyme activation step for 5 min,
followed by 40 cycles of a two-step cycling protocol(95 °C for 30 s and 60 °C
for 1 min) with a ramp rate of 2 °C/second. Post-cycling protocol was in
accordance with the kit instructions (Bio-Rad –186–4034). For TERRA foci
detection following inhibition of transcription, U2OS cells on chamber-
slides were treated with 10 ug/ml ActD, 3 and 8 h prior to IR exposure; cells
were ﬁxed and TERRA foci detected using RNA-FISH as described below.
In vitro cell culture and transfections
Human U2OS ALT cells (provided by Dr. Jiri Lucas, University of
Copenhagen) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium
(DMEM, Hyclone) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and
incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. TRAS1-EN-TRF1 (EN-T) and TRF1-only
plasmids, both driven by a CMV promoter and possessing a C-terminal
FLAG-tag for visualization, were constructed from a CMV-driven TRAS1-
EN-TRF1 plasmid obtained from Dr. Haruhiko Fujiwara (University of
Tokyo).
To
generate
the
TRF1-only
plasmid,
the
TRAS1-EN-
TRF1construct was digested and the EN fragment removed. The mutated
Cas9 pSpCas9m(BB)-2A-Puro (PX462) V2.0 (empty vector) plasmid
(Addgene
plasmid
#62987;
http://n2t.net/addgene:62987;
RRI-
D:Addgene_62987) was provided by Dr. Claudia Wiese (Colorado State
University). Transient transfections of EN-T, TRF1-only (positive control;
previouslyshown to recruitγ-H2AX to telomeres in U2OS ALT cells)88,and
empty vector (EV; transfection control) using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invi-
trogen) were performed per manufacturer’s instructions on cell cultures
reaching ~60–80% conﬂuency in Opti-MEM (Gibco), which was replaced
with regular media 8 h later. Untransfected (UT; negative control) popu-
lations had neither plasmid nor Lipofectamine, and unless speciﬁed
otherwise all experiments were carried out 48 h post-transfection.
A U2OS cell line stably expressing FUCCI-Geminin (green; S-G2-M)
was established by transfecting cells with 0.5 ug of the Kan-FUCCI-Green
(S-G2-M) plasmid (AM-V9016, Amalgaam) as previously described63.
Brieﬂy, plasmids were delivered using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Eight hours following transfec-
tion, Opti-MEM media was replaced with fresh DMEM media. One week
later, cells were trypsinized and individual cells were seeded into a 96-well
plate. A single positive clone was identiﬁed and expanded in the presence of
800 μg/ml G-418 sulfate (GoldBio). After reaching ~90% conﬂuency, cells
were split into a 24-well plate, then 10 days laterinto a 12-well plate, and one
week later into a 6-well plate. Cells were transferred into T-25 ﬂasks, and
then after 6 days into T-75 ﬂasks. The DMEM media containing 800 μg/ml
G-418 sulfate was changed every two days. FUCCI-U2OS cells stably
expressing FUCCI G2-Green were transiently transfected with EN-T or
TRF1-only plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following
manufacture’s instruction. Eight hours following transfection, Opti-MEM
mediawasreplacedwithfreshDMEM media,andcellswereﬁxed48 hpost-
transfection.
RNA ﬂuorescence in-situ hybridization (RNA-FISH)
For combined telomeric C-rich strand detection and FLAG staining, U2OS
expressing FUCCI-SG2-M-Green cells were grown on 4-well chamber
slides (MilliCell EZ). Forty-eight hours following transfection, chambers
were removed and slides washed with Cytoskeleton (CSK) buffer (100 mM
NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM PIPES at pH 6.8, 3 mM MgCl2, 300 mM
sucrose)containing200 mMvanadylfor30 seconds.Cellswerethenﬁxedin
freshly prepared 3% paraformaldehyde in 10X PBS for 12 minutes at room
temperature, and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in CSK buffer
containing 200 mM vanadyl for 7 min at room temperature. Cells were
washed with 70% ethanol and dehydrated through a graded ethanol series
(85%, 95%, 100%). For TERRA (UUAGGG) detection, 0.5 uM (TelC-Alexa
488, Bio-Synthesis) or (TelC- Alexa 647, Bio PNA 1013) Peptide Nucleic
Acid (PNA-CCCTAA) telomere probe was added to the hybridization
buffer [50% (vol/vol) formamide, 2X (vol/vol) saline sodium citrate (SSC)]
with 200 mM vanadyl, and denatured at 85 °C for 10 min and then cooled
on ice. Hybridization buffer (200 ul) was added to each slide and slides were
placed in a humidiﬁed chamber and incubated at 37 °C for 6 h. Slides were
washed twicein50%formamidein2XSSC(2.5 min,42 °C),twicein4XSSC
(2.5 min, 42 °C), and once in 2X SSC + 0.1% NP-40 (2.5 min, 42 °C).
RNaseA + H treatment
To remove both bound and unbound TERRA, ﬁxed and permeabilized
U2OS and U2OS FUCCI-S-G2-M-Green cells were treated with a cocktail
of 1 mg/ml RNaseA (degrades free RNA) and 15 U RNaseH (cleaves RNA
from DNA:RNA hybrids) in 1X RNaseH buffer for 1 h at 37 °C.
Immunoﬂuorescence staining
Blocking nonspeciﬁc immunoglobulin binding following FISH was carried
out with 10% Goat Normal Serum (GNS) for 30 min in a humidiﬁed
chamber at room temperature. Slides were then incubated with primary
antibody in 5% GNS overnight at 4 °C. Slides were washed three times with
1X PBS at room temperature. Protein signals were visualized by incubating
slides with ﬂuorophore-conjugated secondary antibody for 40 min in a
humidiﬁed chamber at room temperature and washed three times in 1X
PBS. Lastly, slides were mounted and counterstained with Prolong Gold
antifade reagent with DAPI (Invitrogen). Primary antibodies and con-
centrationsusedincludemouseantiFLAG(SigmaM2F1804,1:2000),rabbit
anti-human FLAG (Sigma 7425 1:300), mouse anti-human TRF2 (Santa
Cruz B-5, 1:200), and mouse anti-phospho-Histone H2A.X (Ser139), clone
JBW301 (Sigma 05-636, 1:10). Secondary antibodies and concentrations
used include: Alexa-647 goat anti-mouse (ThermoFisher A21236, 1:750),
Alexa-594 goat anti-mouse (ThermoFisher A11005, 1:750), Alexa488 goat
anti-rabbit (ThermoFisher A11008, 1:750). For EdU detection, Click-iT
EdU Alexa Flour 555 (Invitrogen) was used according to manufacturer’s
instructions.
Cell cycle analysis
Utilizing a U2OS cell line stably expressing FUCCI-Geminin, the cell cycle
phase of interphase nuclei was determined. Deﬁnitive identiﬁcation of cells
in S-phase was achieved via pulse-labeling with the thymidine analog 5-
Ethynyl-2´-deoxyuridine (EdU) for 30 min prior to ﬁxation; 10 uM EdU
(Click-iT, Invitrogen) was added to the culture and incubated at 37 °C. The
scoring strategy to distinguish cell cycle phase of transiently transfected
FUCCI U2OS cells was deﬁned as cells positive for FLAG were in G1, cells
positive for FLAG and EdU were in S, and cells positive for FLAG and
GemininGFP were in G2.
Microscopy and quantitative analysis
Images were captured using a Zeiss Axio Imager.Z2 epi-ﬂuorescent
microscope outﬁtted with a 63X/1.4 N.A objective and a Coolsnap ES2
camera,andanalyzedusingZenBluesoftware.Imageswerecapturedforco-
localization 3-D analyses (50 per condition), each consisting of 21 Z-stacks
(0.2 µm per plane) in combinations of 4 wavelengths (colors). Quantitative
analysis was performed using Fiji (ImageJ2 software) and Cell Proﬁler using
our customized pipeline for 3D reconstructions and simultaneous dual and
triple co-localizations of the different markers.
Data analysis
For RNA-seq data analysis, the total baseline counts of all 5-, 6-, and 7-mers
were calculated with jellyﬁsh109 in both the single nuclei RNA-Seq data
(Inspiration4) and poly(A) + RNA-Seq data (Twins Study). These data
were ﬁltered for reads containing UUAGGG 6-mers, accounting for reverse
complementarity. In these sets of reads, the counts of all 5-, 6-, and 7-mers
were againcalculated,accountingforcircularshifts;thenormalizedcountof
each k-mer was calculated as its absolute count divided by the total count of
all k-mers in the dataset for each k (5 ≤k ≤7).
Considering the different experimental designs (Inspiration4: long-
itudinal cohort; Twins Study: synchronized subject/control; and Mt. Everest
climbers: longitudinal cohort), we classiﬁed the data into conceptually
similar categories: ground (either pre-ﬂight or ground control), space effect
(either in-ﬂight or immediately post-ﬂight), and recovery (long-term post-
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
8

ﬂight); and for the Mount Everest data, pre-ascent (low altitude), ascent
(high altitude), and descent (low altitude). The simulated data was classiﬁed
into microgravity (uG) and Earth gravity (1 G) categories.
A Pearson’s correlation matrix of normalized counts of k-mers to the
UUAGGG motif across all samples was calculated. Independently for the
Inspiration4dataandTwinsStudydata,andforeachmotif,Mann–Whitney
U tests were performed between space effect and combined non-space
(ground and recovery) categories. For simulated data, Mann–Whitney U
tests were performed between the uG and 1 G categories, respectively, and
for the Mount Everest data, the tests were performed between the pre-
ascent,ascent,anddescentcategories.Allresultantp-valueswereconsidered
together and adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (correcting
forthefalsediscoveryrate,FDR),andsortedbycorrelationtotheUUAGGG
motif (Supplementary Data 1, 2, 3). For further analysis and visualization,
the ten motifs with the highest correlation (Pearson’s r) to the UUAGGG
motif,includingitself,wereselectedineachdataset.FortheMann–Whitney
U test and the Benjamini–Hochberg correction, the Inspiration4 data was
considered in groups at each timepoint, while the Twins Study and the
Mount Everest data were grouped per category, owing to the lower number
of subjects and samples. Z-scored normalized counts were plotted using
seaborn/matplotlib across all categories and timepoints, together with the
pairwise adjusted p-values (Figs. 1 and 2; Supplementary Fig. 1; Supple-
mentary Data 4).
For in vitro cell culture experiments, all data analyses were performed
usingPrism10.0.0(GraphPadSoftware,Boston,Massachusetts,USA,www.
graphpad.com); Supplementary Data 5 reports all comparison statistics.
For telomeric RNA-FISH (TERRA) analysis following IR exposure
with and without inhibition of transcription (Actinomycin-D treatment),
TERRA foci were counted in treated and control (DMSO) groups using
Metamorph 7.7 (Fig. 3a). Data represent 2 independent experiments (50
cells scored for each condition). Statistical signiﬁcance was assessed by two-
way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test.
For EN-T and TRF1-only transfection analysis (FLAG-DAPI immu-
nostaining), data represent 3 independent experiments (50 cells scored for
each condition); Supplementary Fig. 3. Signiﬁcance was assessed by one-
way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. For telomeric
DSB induction validation and TERRA colocalization utilizing telomere
DNA-FISH and RNA-FISH immunoﬂuorescence (FLAG - γ-H2AX-
C-strand telomere; and TRF2-TERRA, FLAG-TERRA, and FLAG-TRF2
-TERRA), the number of multiple colocalization events was counted from
the sum of 21 Z-stacks reconstructed three-dimensionally using the
deconvolution function on ImageJ (Fig. 3b; Supplementary Fig. 4). Quan-
titativeanalysiswasperformedusingImageJandCellProﬁlerimageanalysis
software 3.1.5. Data represent three independent experiments (50 cells
scored for each condition). Statistical signiﬁcance was assessed by one-way
ANOVA followed by Šídák’s multiple comparisons test and by two-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test, respectively.
For evaluating TERRA distribution (bound vs. unbound), data
represent 3 independent experiments (50 cells scored in each condition);
Supplementary Fig. 5. Statistical signiﬁcance was assessed by two-way
ANOVA followed by Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. For cell cycle and
TERRA distributions (Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7), data represent ﬁve
independent experiments (50 cells scored in each condition). Statistical
signiﬁcancewasassessedbytwo-wayANOVAfollowedbyTukey’smultiple
comparison test.
Human participants research
Informed consent was obtained from all human research participants. The
Inspiration4 crewmembers were consented at an informed consent brieﬁng
conducted at SpaceX (Hawthorne, CA), and samples were collected and
processed under approval of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Weill
Cornell Medicine, under Protocol 21-05023569. The NASA Twins Study
subjects and the Everest climberswere consented under WCM IRBprotocol
#1309014347. All participants consented for data and sample sharing.
Biological materials can be requested through the Cornell Aerospace
MedicineBiobank.Weafﬁrmthatwehavecompliedwithallrelevantethical
regulations.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Datasets for the Inspriation4 crewmembers have been uploaded to two data
repositories: the NASA Open Science Data Repositories (OSDR; osdr.na-
sa.gov; comprised of GeneLab and the Ames Life Sciences Data Archive
[ALSDA],OSD-569and OSD-570),and theTrialXdatabase.Selectdata can
be visualized online through the SOMA Data Explorer: https://epigenetics.
weill.cornell.edu/apps/I4_Multiome/. The datasets generated and analyzed
for the in vitro cell culture studies can be found at https://github.com/
aidanlew/TERRA_DSB.git as Jupyter Lab and Excel ﬁles.
Received: 3 December 2023; Accepted: 6 March 2024;
References
1.
Watson, J. D. Origin of concatameric T7 DNA. Nat. N. Biol. 239,
197–201 (1972).
2.
Olovnikov, A. M. Principle of marginotomy in template synthesis of
polynucleotides. Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR 201, 1496–1499
(1971).
3.
McClintock, B. The stability of broken ends of chromosomes in Zea
mays. Genetics 126, 234–282 (1941).
4.
de Lange, T. How telomeres solve the end-protection problem.
Science 326, 948–952 (2009).
5.
Moyzis, R. K. et al. A highly conserved repetitive DNA sequence,
(TTAGGG)n, present at the telomeres of human chromosomes.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 85, 6622–6626 (1988).
6.
Meyne, J., Ratliff, R. L. & Moyzis, R. K. Conservation of the human
telomeresequence(TTAGGG)namongvertebrates.Proc.Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 86, 7049–7053 (1989).
7.
Grigorev, K. etal.Haplotypediversityandsequenceheterogeneityof
human telomeres. Genome Res. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.274639.
120 (2021).
8.
Bianchi, A. et al. TRF1 binds a bipartite telomeric site with extreme
spatial ﬂexibility. Embo J. 18, 5735–5744 (1999).
9.
Zhao, Y., Hoshiyama, H., Shay, J. W. & Wright, W. E. Quantitative
telomeric overhang determination using a double-strand speciﬁc
nuclease. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, e14 (2008).
10.
Greider, C. W. & Blackburn, E. H. Identiﬁcation of a Speciﬁc
Telomere Terminal Transferase-Activity in Tetrahymena Extracts.
Cell 43, 405–413 (1985).
11.
Grifﬁth, J. D. et al. Mammalian telomeres end in a large duplex loop.
Cell 97, 503–514 (1999).
12.
Tomaska, L., Cesare, A. J., AlTurki,T. M. & Grifﬁth, J. D.Twenty years
of t-loops: A case study for the importance of collaboration in
molecular biology. DNA Repair. 94, 102901 (2020).
13.
Chong, L. et al. A Human Telomeric Protein. Science 270,
1663–1667 (1995).
14.
Broccoli, D., Smogorzewska, A., Chong, L. & de Lange, T. Human
telomeres contain two distinct Myb-related proteins, TRF1 and
TRF2. Nat. Genet. 17, 231–235 (1997).
15.
de Lange, T. Shelterin: the protein complex that shapes and
safeguards human telomeres. Genes Dev. 19, 2100–2110 (2005).
16.
Harley, C. B., Futcher, A. B. & Greider, C. W. Telomeres Shorten
During Aging of Human Fibroblasts. Nature 345, 458–460 (1990).
17.
von Zglinicki, T. Oxidative stress shortens telomeres. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 27, 339–344 (2002).
18.
Epel, E. S. et al. Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life
stress. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 17312–17315 (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
9

19.
Paul, L. Diet, nutrition and telomere length. J. Nutr. Biochem. 22,
895–901 (2011).
20.
Blackburn, E. H. & Epel, E. S. Telomeres and adversity: Too toxic to
ignore. Nature 490, 169–171 (2012).
21.
McKenna, M. J. et al. Chromosome Translocations, Inversions and
Telomere Length for Retrospective Biodosimetry on Exposed U.S.
Atomic Veterans. Radiat. Res. 191, 311–322 (2019).
22.
Luxton, J. J. et al. Temporal Telomere and DNA Damage Responses
in the Space Radiation Environment. Cell Rep., 33, 108435
(2020).
23.
Honig, L. S., Kang, M. S., Schupf, N., Lee, J. H. & Mayeux, R.
Association of shorter leukocyte telomere repeat length with
dementia and mortality. Arch. Neurol. 69, 1332–1339 (2012).
24.
Shay, J. W. Are short telomeres predictive of advanced cancer?
Cancer Discov. 3, 1096–1098 (2013).
25.
Haycock, P. C. et al. Leucocyte telomere length and risk of
cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ
349, g4227 (2014).
26.
Kim, N. W. et al. Speciﬁc Association of Human Telomerase Activity
With Immortal Cells and Cancer. Science 266, 2011–2015
(1994).
27.
Murnane, J. P., Sabatier, L., Marder, B. A. & Morgan, W. F. Telomere
Dynamics in an Immortal Human Cell-Line. Embo J. 13,
4953–4962 (1994).
28.
Bryan, T. M., Englezou, A., Gupta, J., Bacchetti, S. & Reddel, R. R.
Telomere elongation in immortal human cells without detectable
telomerase activity. Embo J. 14, 4240–4248 (1995).
29.
Reddel, R. R., Bryan, T. M. & Murnane, J. P. Immortalized cells with
no detectable telomerase activity. A review. Biochem. Mosc. 62,
1254–1262 (1997).
30.
Bailey, S. M., Brenneman, M. A. & Goodwin, E. H. Frequent
recombination in telomeric DNA may extend the proliferative life of
telomerase-negative cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 32,
3743–3751 (2004).
31.
Henson, J. D., Neumann, A. A., Yeager, T. R. & Reddel, R. R.
Alternative lengthening of telomeres in mammalian cells. Oncogene
21, 598–610 (2002).
32.
Cesare, A. J. & Reddel, R. R. Alternative lengthening of telomeres:
models, mechanisms and implications. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11,
319–330 (2010).
33.
Azzalin, C. M., Reichenbach, P., Khoriauli, L., Giulotto, E. & Lingner,
J. Telomeric repeat containing RNA and RNA surveillance factors at
mammalian chromosome ends. Science 318, 798–801 (2007).
34.
Schoeftner, S. & Blasco, M. A. Developmentally regulated
transcription of mammalian telomeres by DNA-dependent RNA
polymerase II. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 228–236 (2008).
35.
Al-Turki, T. M. & Grifﬁth, J. D. Mammalian telomeric RNA (TERRA)
can be translated to produce valine-arginine and glycine-leucine
dipeptide repeat proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 120,
e2221529120 (2023).
36.
Porro, A., Feuerhahn, S., Reichenbach, P. & Lingner, J. Molecular
dissection of telomeric repeat-containing RNA biogenesis unveils
the presence of distinct and multiple regulatory pathways. Mol. Cell
Biol. 30, 4808–4817 (2010).
37.
Azzalin, C. M. & Lingner, J. Telomere functions grounding on TERRA
ﬁrma. Trends Cell Biol. 25, 29–36 (2015).
38.
Arora, R. et al. RNaseH1 regulates TERRA-telomeric DNA hybrids
and telomere maintenance in ALT tumour cells. Nat. Commun. 5,
5220 (2014).
39.
Bettin, N., Oss Pegorar, C. & Cusanelli, E. The Emerging Roles of
TERRA in Telomere Maintenance and Genome Stability. Cells 8,
https://doi.org/10.3390/cells8030246 (2019).
40.
Feretzaki, M. et al. RAD51-dependent recruitment of TERRA lncRNA
to telomeres through R-loops. Nature 587, 303–308 (2020).
41.
Deng, Z., Norseen, J., Wiedmer, A., Riethman, H. & Lieberman, P. M.
TERRA RNA binding to TRF2 facilitates heterochromatin formation
and ORC recruitment at telomeres. Mol. Cell 35, 403–413 (2009).
42.
Feuerhahn, S., Iglesias, N., Panza, A., Porro, A. & Lingner, J. TERRA
biogenesis, turnover and implications for function. FEBS Lett. 584,
3812–3818 (2010).
43.
Lopez de Silanes, I., Stagno d’Alcontres, M. & Blasco, M. A. TERRA
transcripts are bound by a complex array of RNA-binding proteins.
Nat. Commun. 1, 33 (2010).
44.
Le, P. N., Maranon, D. G., Altina, N. H., Battaglia, C. L. & Bailey, S. M.
TERRA, hnRNP A1, and DNA-PKcs Interactions at Human
Telomeres. Front. Oncol. 3, 91 (2013).
45.
Lalonde, M. & Chartrand, P. TERRA, a Multifaceted Regulator of
Telomerase Activity at Telomeres. J. Mol. Biol. 432, 4232–4243 (2020).
46.
Kar, A., Willcox, S. & Grifﬁth, J. D. Transcription of telomeric DNA
leads to high levels of homologous recombination and t-loops.
Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 9369–9380 (2016).
47.
Fernandes, R. V., Feretzaki, M. & Lingner, J. The makings of TERRA
R-loops at chromosome ends. Cell Cycle 20, 1745–1759 (2021).
48.
Silva, B., Arora, R., Bione, S. & Azzalin, C. M. TERRA transcription
destabilizes telomere integrity to initiate break-induced replication in
human ALT cells. Nat. Commun. 12, 3760 (2021).
49.
Heaphy, C. M. et al. Prevalence of the alternative lengthening of
telomeres telomere maintenance mechanism in human cancer
subtypes. Am. J. Pathol. 179, 1608–1615 (2011).
50.
Lewis, P. W., Elsaesser, S. J., Noh, K. M., Stadler, S. C. & Allis, C. D.
Daxx is an H3.3-speciﬁc histone chaperone and cooperates with
ATRX in replication-independent chromatin assembly at telomeres.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 14075–14080 (2010).
51.
Flynn, R. L. et al. Alternative lengthening of telomeres renders cancer
cells hypersensitive to ATR inhibitors. Science 347, 273–277 (2015).
52.
Nguyen, D. T. et al. The chromatin remodelling factor ATRX
suppresses R-loops in transcribed telomeric repeats. EMBO Rep.
18, 914–928 (2017).
53.
Hu, Y. et al. RNA-DNA Hybrids Support Recombination-Based
Telomere Maintenance in Fission Yeast. Genetics 213,
431–447 (2019).
54.
Maciejowski, J. & de Lange, T. Telomeres in cancer: tumour
suppression and genome instability. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18,
175–186 (2017).
55.
Doksani, Y. The Response to DNA Damage at Telomeric Repeats
and Its Consequences for Telomere Function. Genes 10, https://doi.
org/10.3390/genes10040318 (2019).
56.
Miller, D., Reynolds, G. E., Mejia, R., Stark, J. M. & Murnane, J. P.
Subtelomeric regions in mammalian cells are deﬁcient in DNA
double-strand break repair. DNA Repair. 10, 536–544 (2011).
57.
Muraki, K., Nyhan, K., Han, L. & Murnane, J. P. Mechanisms of
telomere loss and their consequences for chromosome instability.
Front. Oncol. 2, 135 (2012).
58.
Cho, N. W., Dilley, R. L., Lampson, M. A. & Greenberg, R. A.
Interchromosomal homology searches drive directional ALT
telomere movement and synapsis. Cell 159, 108–121 (2014).
59.
Doksani, Y. & de Lange, T. Telomere-Internal Double-Strand Breaks
Are Repaired by Homologous Recombination and PARP1/Lig3-
Dependent End-Joining. Cell Rep. 17, 1646–1656 (2016).
60.
Liu, H. et al. Telomeric Recombination Induced by DNA Damage
Results in Telomere Extension and Length Heterogeneity. Neoplasia
20, 905–916 (2018).
61.
Anzai, T., Takahashi, H. & Fujiwara, H. Sequence-speciﬁc
recognition and cleavage of telomeric repeat (TTAGG)(n) by
endonuclease of non-long terminal repeat retrotransposon TRAS1.
Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 100–108 (2001).
62.
Yoshitake, K., Aoyagi, H. & Fujiwara, H. Creation of a novel telomere-
cutting endonuclease based on the EN domain of telomere-speciﬁc
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
10

non-long terminal repeat retrotransposon, TRAS1. Mob. DNA 1,
13 (2010).
63.
Nelson, C. B. et al. Telomeric Double Strand Breaks in G1 Human
Cells Facilitate Formation of 5’ C-Rich Overhangs and Recruitment
of TERRA. Front. Genet. 12, 644803 (2021).
64.
Takai, H., Smogorzewska, A. & de Lange, T. DNA damage foci at
dysfunctional telomeres. Curr. Biol. 13, 1549–1556 (2003).
65.
Oganesian, L. & Karlseder, J. Mammalian 5’ C-rich telomeric
overhangs are a mark of recombination-dependent telomere
maintenance. Mol. Cell 42, 224–236 (2011).
66.
Oganesian, L. & Karlseder, J. 5’ C-rich telomeric overhangs are an
outcome of rapid telomere truncation events. DNA Repair. 12,
238–245 (2013).
67.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: A
multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight.
Science 364, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau8650 (2019).
68.
Luxton, J. J. et al. Telomere Length Dynamics and DNA Damage
Responses Associated with Long-Duration Spaceﬂight. Cell Rep.,
108457, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108457 (2020).
69.
Sishc, B. J. et al. Telomeres and Telomerase in the Radiation
Response: Implications for Instability, Reprograming, and
Carcinogenesis. Front. Oncol. 5, 257 (2015).
70.
Sun, L. et al. Targeted DNA damage at individual telomeres disrupts
their integrity and triggers cell death. Nucleic Acids Res. 43,
6334–6347 (2015).
71.
Overbey, E. G. et al. Collection of Biospecimens from the
Inspiration4 Mission Establishes the Standards for the Space Omics
and Medical Atlas (SOMA). Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-48806-z (2024).
72.
Garcia-Medina, S. et al. Genome and Clonal Hematopoiesis Stability
Contrasts with Immune, cfDNA, mitochondrial, and telomere length
changes to Short Duration Spaceﬂight. Precision Clin. Med. https://
doi.org/10.1093/pcmedi/pbae007 (2024).
73.
Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental Biological Features of
Spaceﬂight: Advancing the Field to Enable Deep-Space Exploration.
Cell 183, 1162–1184 (2020).
74.
Houerbi, N. et al. Secretome proﬁling reveals acute changes in
oxidative stress, brain homeostasis, and coagulation following
short-duration spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-48841-w (2024).
75.
Kim, J. et al. Single-cell multi-ome and immune proﬁles of the
Inspiration4 crew reveal conserved, cell-type, and sex-speciﬁc
responses to spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-49211-2 (2024).
76.
Grigorev, K. et al. Direct RNA sequencing of astronaut blood reveals
spaceﬂight-associated m6A increases and hematopoietic
transcriptional responses. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-48929-3 (2024).
77.
Bailey, S. M. et al. Ad Astra - telomeres in space! Int J. Radiat. Biol.
98, 395–403 (2022).
78.
Luxton, J. J. et al. Telomere Length Dynamics and Chromosomal
Instability for Predicting Individual Radiosensitivity and Risk via
Machine Learning. J. Pers. Med. 11, https://doi.org/10.3390/
jpm11030188 (2021).
79.
Conomos, D. et al. Variant repeats are interspersed throughout the
telomeres and recruit nuclear receptors in ALT cells. J. Cell Biol. 199,
893–906 (2012).
80.
Fu, W. et al. Single Cell Analysis Identiﬁes Conserved Features of
ImmuneDysfunction inSimulatedMicrogravity andSpaceﬂight. Nat.
Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42013-y (2024).
81.
Zahran, S. et al. Stress and telomere shortening among central
Indian conservation refugees. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,
E928–E936 (2015).
82.
Wang, Z. et al. Telomeric repeat-containing RNA (TERRA)
constitutes a nucleoprotein component of extracellular
inﬂammatory exosomes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,
E6293–E6300 (2015).
83.
Varshney, D., Spiegel,J.,Zyner, K.,Tannahill,D.& Balasubramanian,
S. The regulation and functions of DNA and RNA G-quadruplexes.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 459–474 (2020).
84.
Luke, B. & Lingner, J. TERRA: telomeric repeat-containing RNA.
EMBO J. 28, 2503–2510 (2009).
85.
Rogakou, E. P., Boon, C., Redon, C. & Bonner, W. M. Megabase
chromatin domains involved in DNA double-strand breaks in vivo.
J. Cell Biol. 146, 905–916 (1999).
86.
anSteensel, B. & deLange, T. Control of telomere length by the
human telomeric protein TRF1. Nature 385, 740–743 (1997).
87.
Munoz, P. et al. TRF1 controls telomere length and mitotic ﬁdelity in
epithelial homeostasis. Mol. Cell Biol. 29, 1608–1625 (2009).
88.
Azarm, K., Bhardwaj, A., Kim, E. & Smith, S. Persistent telomere
cohesion protects aged cells from premature senescence. Nat.
Commun. 11, 3321 (2020).
89.
Diller, L. et al. p53 functions as a cell cycle control protein in
osteosarcomas. Mol. Cell Biol. 10, 5772–5781 (1990).
90.
Tan, J. et al. An R-loop-initiated CSB-RAD52-POLD3 pathway
suppresses ROS-induced telomeric DNA breaks.Nucleic AcidsRes.
48, 1285–1300 (2020).
91.
Sakaue-Sawano, A. et al. Visualizing spatiotemporal dynamics
of multicellular cell-cycle progression. Cell 132, 487–498
(2008).
92.
Fiszer-Kierzkowska, A. et al. Liposome-based DNA carriers may
induce cellular stress response and change gene expression pattern
in transfected cells. BMC Mol. Biol. 12, 27 (2011).
93.
Mason, C. E. et al. The Second Space Age. Omics, Platforms, and
Medicine Across Orbits. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
024-07586-8 (2024).
94.
Wuest, S. L., Richard, S., Kopp, S., Grimm, D. & Egli, M. Simulated
microgravity: critical review on the use of random positioning
machines for mammalian cell culture. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015,
971474 (2015).
95.
Mason, C. E., Sierra, M. A., Feng, H. J. & Bailey, S. M. Telomeres and
aging: on and off the planet! Biogerontology 25, 313–327 (2024).
96.
Sadhukhan, R., Chowdhury,P., Ghosh, S. & Ghosh, U. Expression of
Telomere-Associated Proteins is Interdependent to Stabilize Native
Telomere Structure and Telomere Dysfunction by G-Quadruplex
Ligand Causes TERRA Upregulation. Cell Biochem. Biophys. 76,
311–319 (2018).
97.
Oh, B. K. et al. Increased amounts and stability of telomeric repeat-
containing RNA (TERRA) following DNA damage induced by
etoposide. PLoS One 14, e0225302 (2019).
98.
Shim, G., Ricoul, M., Hempel, W. M., Azzam, E. I. & Sabatier, L.
Crosstalk between telomere maintenance and radiation effects: A
key player in the process of radiation-induced carcinogenesis.
Mutat. Res. Rev. Mutat Res. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mrrev.2014.
01.001 (2014).
99.
Galigniana, N. M., Charo, N. L., Uranga, R., Cabanillas, A. M. &
Piwien-Pilipuk, G. Oxidative stress induces transcription of
telomeric repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) by engaging PKA
signaling and cytoskeleton dynamics. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol.
Cell Res. 1867, 118643 (2020).
100.
Pires, V. B. et al. RNA-DNA hybrids prevent resection at
dysfunctional telomeres. Cell Rep. 42, 112077 (2023).
101.
Meers, C., Keskin, H. & Storici, F. DNA repair by RNA: Templated, or
not templated, that is the question. DNA Repair. 44, 17–21
(2016).
102.
Mazina, O. M., Keskin, H., Hanamshet, K., Storici, F. & Mazin, A. V.
Rad52 Inverse Strand Exchange Drives RNA-Templated DNA
Double-Strand Break Repair. Mol. Cell 67, 19–29.e13 (2017).
103.
Rinn, J. L. & Chang, H. Y. Genome regulation by long noncoding
RNAs. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 81, 145–166 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
11

104.
De Rosa, M. & Opresko, P. L. Translating the telomeres. Trends
Genet. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2023.04.009 (2023).
105.
Furman, D. et al. Expression of speciﬁc inﬂammasome gene
modules stratiﬁes older individuals into two extreme clinical and
immunological states. Nat. Med. 23, 174–184 (2017).
106.
Liguori, I. et al. Oxidative stress, aging, and diseases. Clin. Inter.
Aging 13, 757–772 (2018).
107.
Silva, B., Arora, R. & Azzalin, C. M. The alternative lengthening of
telomeres mechanism jeopardizes telomere integrity if not properly
restricted. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2208669119 (2022).
108.
Jones, C. W. et al. Molecular and physiologic changes in the SpaceX
Inspiration4 civilian crew. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
024-07648-x (2024).
109.
Marcais, G. & Kingsford, C. A fast, lock-free approach for efﬁcient
parallel counting of occurrences of k-mers. Bioinformatics 27,
764–770 (2011).
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank all study participants, Dr. Haruhiko Fujiwara for
supplying the TRAS1-EN-TRF1 plasmid, Dr. Claudia Wiese for the empty
vector (mutated Cas9) plasmid, and Dr. Jiri Lucas for the U2OS cell line.
C.E.M. thanks the WorldQuant Foundation, NASA (NNX14AH50G,
NNX17AB26G, 80NSSC22K0254, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2,
80NSSC23K0832, NNX16AO69A), the National Institutes of Health
(R01MH117406, P01CA214274 R01CA249054), and the LLS (MCL7001-
18, LLS 9238-16), and the GI Research Foundation (GIRF). S.M.B. gratefully
acknowledges funding from NASA (NNX14AB02G, 80NSSC19K0434,
80NSSC23K0832).
Author contributions
T.M.A-T., D.G.M., C.B.N. and S.M.B. conceived the studies reported here.
T.M.A-T., D.G.M., C.B.N., A.M.L., J.J.L., L.E.T., N.A., F.W, JK.K, N.D., E.O.,
C.M., K.G., D.F., C.E.M., S.M.B., H.D. and D.A.W. participated in sample
collection and processing, experimental execution, and/or data processing
and analyses. C.E.M. and lab led the Inspiration4 studies and cDNA/RNA
sequence production and analysis, and contributed to the modeling. All
authors analyzed data, exchanged ideas, and edited the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the work.
Competing interests
The authors declare the following competing interests: C.E.M. is a co-
Founder of Onegevity, and Cosmica Biosciences; S.M.B. is a co-founder
and Scientiﬁc Advisory Board member of KromaTiD, Inc. All other authors
declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Christopher E. Mason or Susan M. Bailey.
Peer review information This manuscript has been previously reviewed at
another Nature Portfolio journal. Communications Biology thanks the
anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Primary Handling Editors: Christina Karlsson Rosenthal.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other
thirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCommons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of
this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-06014-x
Article
Communications Biology |  (2024) 7:698 
12
