Test of Arabidopsis Space
Transcriptome: A Discovery
Environment to Explore
Multiple Plant Biology
Spaceﬂight Experiments
Richard Barker 1, Jonathan Lombardino 1,2, Kai Rasmussen 1 and Simon Gilroy 1*
1 Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States, 2 Microbiology Doctoral Training Program,
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States
Recent advances in the routine access to space along with increasing opportunities to
perform plant growth experiments on board the International Space Station have led to an
ever-increasing body of transcriptomic, proteomic, and epigenomic data from plants
experiencing spaceﬂight. These datasets hold great promise to help understand how
plant biology reacts to this unique environment. However, analyses that mine across such
expanses of data are often complex to implement, being impeded by the sheer number of
potential comparisons that are possible. Complexities in how the output of these multiple
parallel analyses can be presented to the researcher in an accessible and intuitive form
provides further barriers to such research. Recent developments in computational systems
biology have led to rapid advances in interactive data visualization environments designed
to perform just such tasks. However, to date none of these tools have been tailored to the
analysis of the broad-ranging plant biology spaceﬂight data. We have therefore developed
the Test Of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome (TOAST) database (https://astrobiology.
botany.wisc.edu/astrobotany-toast) to address this gap in our capabilities. TOAST is a
relational database that uses the Qlik database management software to link plant biology,
spaceﬂight-related omics datasets, and their associated metadata. This environment helps
visualize relationships across multiple levels of experiments in an easy to use gene-centric
platform. TOAST draws on data from The US National Aeronautics and Space
Administration’s (NASA’s) GeneLab and other data repositories and also connects
results to a suite of web-based analytical tools to facilitate further investigation of
responses to spaceﬂight and related stresses. The TOAST graphical user interface
allows for quick comparisons between plant spaceﬂight experiments using real-time,
gene-speciﬁc queries, or by using functional gene ontology, Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes pathway, or other ﬁltering systems to explore genetic networks of
interest. Testing of the database shows that TOAST conﬁrms patterns of gene expression
already highlighted in the literature, such as revealing the modulation of oxidative stress-
related responses across multiple plant spaceﬂight experiments. However, this data
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
1
Edited by:
Thomas Graham,
University of Guelph, Canada
Reviewed by:
Atsushi Fukushima,
RIKEN, Japan
John Z. Kiss,
University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, United States
*Correspondence:
Simon Gilroy
sgilroy@wisc.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Plant Abiotic Stress,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Plant Science
Received: 18 November 2019
Accepted: 30 January 2020
Published: 04 March 2020
Citation:
Barker R, Lombardino J,
Rasmussen K and Gilroy S (2020) Test
of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome:
A Discovery Environment to Explore
Multiple Plant Biology
Spaceﬂight Experiments.
Front. Plant Sci. 11:147.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.00147
METHODS
published: 04 March 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.00147

exploration environment can also drive new insights into patterns of spaceﬂight responsive
gene expression. For example, TOAST analyses highlight changes to mitochondrial
function as likely shared responses in many plant spaceﬂight experiments.
Keywords: Arabidopsis thaliana, spaceﬂight, transcriptomics, RNAseq, microarray, proteomics,
bioinformatics, Qlik
INTRODUCTION
As a possible integral feature of life support systems, plants offer
the potential to provide food, replenish the air, ﬁlter water, and
improve the mental health of the crew during long-duration
missions in space. Therefore, at a practical level, plants are being
intensively studied to assess their ability to adequately fulﬁll these
roles in the spaceﬂight environment [reviewed in (Wheeler,
2017)]. In addition, a growing number of plant spaceﬂight
studies are addressing the quest for fundamental knowledge
about how plant biology operates. Thus, the spaceﬂight
environment provides conditions that are inaccessible on
Earth, such as growth in microgravity and exposure to cosmic
radiation, providing a unique opportunity to dissect responses
under conditions that plant biology has not encountered during
its evolutionary history [reviewed in (Vandenbrink and Kiss,
2016; Paul et al., 2013a)].
These studies are now generating extensive characterizations
of the responses of diverse plant species to spaceﬂight. As part of
the output from this research, there is an ever-increasing set of
genome-scale analyses that range from transcriptomics [e.g.,
(Kwon et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2017; Paul et al., 2017; Choi
et al., 2019; Herranz et al., 2019; Vandenbrink et al., 2019)] and
proteomics [e.g., (Mazars et al., 2014; Ferl et al., 2015; Basu et al.,
2017)] to epigenomics [e.g., (Zhou et al., 2019)]. These datasets
help catalog the plant response to growing in space. For example,
the omics database maintained by The National Aeronautics and
Space Administration’s (NASA’s) GeneLab program (GeneLab,
2019) contains, at the time of writing, data from over 200
spaceﬂight-related experiments, with about 20 plant-focused
studies, mainly from research conducted using the Space
Shuttle and International Space Station. In addition, similar
spaceﬂight and related data from e.g., the Japanese, Chinese,
and European space agencies have been deposited in a range of
other publicly accessible data repositories such as NCBI GEO
(Barrett et al., 2013) and the European CATdb (Gagnot et al.,
2008). Each experiment has multiple spaceﬂight samples and
often compares the responses of wild-type and mutants in
spaceﬂight to parallel ground-based controls performed on the
Earth. Research groups have then mined, e.g., the patterns of
transcriptional change seen in individual experiments to reveal
potential underlying plant responses to spaceﬂight. Thus,
changes in the expression of heat shock proteins [e.g.,
(Zupanska et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017;
Choi et al., 2019)], cell wall peroxidases [e.g., (Correll et al., 2013;
Kwon et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2017; Choi
et al., 2019)], and a general response to oxidative stress [e.g.,
(Sugimoto et al., 2014; Choi et al., 2019)] have all emerged as
response signatures identiﬁed in some, but not all, plant
spaceﬂight transcriptomes. However, the scale of the available
data now poses challenges when making such comparisons
between diverse experiments. Thus, (1) the datasets are
distributed across multiple repositories, posing potential issues
with accessibility and interoperability, (2) the bioinformatics-
based analytical approaches used between published studies are
often very different, making robust comparisons of differences
drawn from the literature challenging, (3) the sheer scale of the
data makes it hard to perform more than a few comparisons
between experiments before its volume becomes limiting, and (4)
it is often difﬁcult to present these kinds of broad-scale
comparative analyses in a visually accessible, intuitive manner
for use by a broad scientiﬁc audience.
To address these challenges, we have developed the Test Of
Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome (TOAST; a compilation of the
abbreviations and terms used throughout, along with a brief
deﬁnition of each is presented as a glossary in the Appendix)
database. TOAST uses a database management software called
Qlik (Qlik Technologies Inc., King of Prussia, PA, USA) to
aggregate and visualize plant spaceﬂight omics-level data from
multiple repositories. It applies a uniform set of analytical steps to
the data and makes visualization of massive datasets accessible,
allowing for interactive comparisons between experiments. The
database also provides links to experiment metadata and a suite of
online tools to enhance the scope of potential further analysis. In
this publication we present an overview of the TOAST database
and provide examples of how it can both validate previously
published inferences as to likely spaceﬂight-imposed stress
responses and mine across the plant spaceﬂight transcriptomics
data to facilitate the generation of new hypotheses.
A BROAD SET OF AVAILABLE DATA
UNDERLIES THE TOAST DATA
EXPLORATION ENVIRONMENT
As a ﬁrst step toward designing a comprehensive tool for the
analysis of plant spaceﬂight omics-level data, we categorized the
breadth of data available to support such an exploration
environment. As most studies have generated transcriptomics
data, we have focused on these datasets, although the TOAST
database also includes the currently few available proteomic
(Mazars et al., 2014; Ferl et al., 2015; Basu et al., 2017) and
epigenomic (Zhou et al., 2019) plant spaceﬂight datasets. NASA's
GeneLab program maintains a publicly accessible data repository
that brings together a large amount of such genome-scale
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
2

spaceﬂight data (GeneLab, 2019). Although the GeneLab site has
the highest density of these kinds of spaceﬂight-related datasets,
the global spaceﬂight research community has deposited a large
amount of data generated by similar genome-scale experiments
in other data repositories such as NCBI-GEO (Barrett et al.,
2013) and CATdb (Gagnot et al., 2008). Figure 1 presents an
analysis of the spectrum of plant species and experimentation
available for incorporation into a plant-focused data exploration
environment (see Supplementary Table 1 for the source list of
the plant biology data repositories). The most highly researched
plant is Arabidopsis thaliana, being the predominant plant
model for molecular analysis, with the Col-0 ecotype most
frequently chosen for spaceﬂight experimentation. Rice [Oriza
sativa; (Jin et al., 2015)], mizuna [Brassica rapa; (Sugimoto et al.,
2014)], and the fern Ceratopteris richardii (Salmi and Roux,
2008) have also been the focus of similar molecular analysis.
Figure 1A breaks down the available data into species and
genotype versus analytical approach (e.g., microarray or
RNAseq technologies), showing that the majority of the
available data has been generated using Affymetrix microarrays
or Illumina-based RNAseq to monitor patterns of gene
expression. Figure 1B further shows that although the
predominant sample analyzed in multiple plant spaceﬂight
experiments is the whole seedling, data is available from
several experiments using cell cultures and from individual
organs dissected after the plants had been grown in space.
This survey of the available plant biology spaceﬂight-related
data suggested to us that there is a strong base of publicly
accessible, genome-level datasets with which to populate a
database designed to help visualize and compare between plant
spaceﬂight experiments. For example, there are multiple
experiments using similar species and analyzing similar tissues;
transcriptomics data for Arabidopsis is particularly extensive. We
set a minimum criterion for inclusion in the initial iteration of
TOAST to be studies where statistically rigorous analyses can be
applied. This approach means datasets are required to contain
three or more biological replicates and at present only spaceﬂight
experiments on Arabidopsis and rice fulﬁll this requirement. We
FIGURE 1 | Publicly available spaceﬂight transcriptomics datasets. (A) Relationships between species, ecotype, genotype (i.e., mutant or wild type) growth
environment and assay technique for datasets from plants experiencing spaceﬂight. (B) Relationships between species, ecotypeand genotype versus the tissue or
organ type that was sampled to generate the tspaceﬂight-related transcriptomics dataset. Col-0, Columbia ecotype of Arabidopsis thaliana; Ws, Wassilewskija
ecotype; Ler, Landsberg erecta ecotype; Cvi, Cape Verdi Islands ecotype; mutants of Arabidopsis: phyD, Phytochrome D; arg, Altered Response to Gravity; act2,
Actin 2; phyD, phytochrome D; hsfa2, heat shock factor a2, Wt, wild type; BRIC, Biological Research in Canister; ABRS, Advanced Biological Research System;
EMCS, European Modular Cultivation System.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
3

have therefore imported all of the available, replicated Arabidopsis
and rice plant spaceﬂight datasets into the TOAST database. In
addition, we have added a series of ground-based datasets
addressing spaceﬂight-related factors, such as effects of increased
radiation or exposure to oxidative stress on Earth as the
foundation with which to build the TOAST exploration
environment (these datasets are summarized in Supplementary
Table 1).
TOAST DESIGN PHILOSOPHY AND
DATA STRUCTURE
As noted above, the underlying software engine behind TOAST
is the Qlik Associative Engine (Qlik Technologies Inc., King of
Prussia, PA, USA). We chose to use Qlik as it not only provides
the tools to develop and administer the underlying relational
database but also allows the user to readily see what other
information in the database is associated with their current
query via a software feature built into QLIK named the Qlik
Associative Data Engine. In addition, Qlik integrates graphic
visualization packages that allow intuitive, interactive
exploration and analysis of the data. Such tools help ensure the
data will be more readily accessible not only to plant space
biology researchers and bioinformaticians but also to a much
broader community, including non-specialists and students.
Data was therefore imported into a Qlik-managed database
(Supplementary Table 1) to generate the associative database
outlined in Figure 2 that forms the foundation of TOAST
functionality. However, the various data sources use a variety
of indices for gene identiﬁcation that range from Affymetrix
FIGURE 2 | Database structure underlying TOAST 4.5. Each dataset within TOAST includes a series of pre-computed factors for each gene: minimally including
fold-change, P-value, Q-value, and a yes/no value for whether the fold-change for each gene is signiﬁcant at P < 0.05. These pre-computed values greatly speed the
real-time processing of interactive visualizations within the TOAST user interface. The identiﬁers in the raw data, such as Transcript ID from RNAseq, Probe ID for
Microarray, or TAIR ID are translated to their unique Entrez and Ensembl IDs to allow for uniform indexing within TOAST itself and to facilitate passing of analyzed
data produced by TOAST analyses to exterior sites and tools. Within TOAST, the strings of molecular ID's from a dataset are both directly transferred to a series of
data visualization and exploration tools and are imported into a series of analytical packages accessing a range of databases that have been imported into the
TOAST environment. These databases include: the Genome Ontology (GO) consortium databases that allow analysis of the relationships between gene lists of
interest and known biological processes, the SUBA4 database which catalogs predicted subcellular locales for each gene, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) database that analyzes relationships to known cellular pathways, and Ensembl's Orthologous Matrix database, allowing TOAST to make
comparisons between species. The outputs of these analytical modules are then passed to TOAST's interactive data visualization tools to help explore each dataset.
Results from the visualizations are in turn returned as lists of Gene IDs to allow for reiterative analyses.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
4

microarray probe name (i.e., the Affymetrix microarray
technology's speciﬁc technical name for the DNA probe used
to identify a particular gene) to Arabidopsis Genome Initiative
(AGI) locus codes [i.e., unique gene identiﬁers assigned by the
consortium of researchers forming the Arabidopsis Genome
Initiative; (Kaul et al., 2000)]. We therefore ﬁrst re-indexed all
the datasets to use Entrez gene identiﬁers (Maglott et al., 2011).
Entrez is the National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI)'s database for gene-speciﬁc information and it assigns
gene identiﬁers, or codes, that uniquely identify a particular gene.
The advantage of these identiﬁers in tracing a gene from one
dataset to another is that they form a uniform, well-curated
indexing system speciﬁcally developed to be applied across all
organisms. Entrez gene names uniquely identify individual genes
and importantly, the system has been developed to expand as
new genes are identiﬁed. Thus, re-indexing the gene identiﬁers in
TOAST from the varied standards used in the imported datasets
to their Entrez identiﬁers served several purposes: (1) it allows
for comparisons within the TOAST database via a uniform
labeling system, (2) it facilitates data exchange with other
databases and analytical tools, anchoring the data to the global
Entrez standard, and (3) it builds scalability into the database
architecture as Entrez identiﬁers are designed to provide a
standard for indexing all current and future documented genes.
If the original authors' data structure matched that of our
database model (minimally, fold-change, P-value, Bonferroni
corrected Q-value), we imported their analysis that
incorporated their statistical models for calculating P- and Q-
values. However, some of the publicly available microarray
dataset analyses lacked some of these minimum requirements
(most typically missing a statistical analysis of signiﬁcance of
reported changes) and so had to be reprocessed for
incorporation into TOAST. For this reanalysis (exclusively
Affymetrix ATH1 microarray data), we used R-studio codes
provided courtesy of NASA's GeneLab. R is a programming
language widely used in the statistical analysis of scientiﬁc data
(https://www.r-project.org/about.html) and R-studio is
commercially produced software that aids with the
development of programs using R (R-Studio Inc. Boston, MA,
USA). These R-studio codes were customized for each
experimental design to provide the required ﬁelds of fold-
change, P-, and Bonferroni corrected Q-values using Robust
Multichip Average (RMA) quantile normalization (Irizarry
et al., 2003), a technique that accounts for variation across
multiple microarray chips used in these analyses. These codes
can be found at https://github.com/dr-richard-barker/NASA-
GeneLab-MicroArray-Codes. Further analysis was then
performed on the imported data from Arabidopsis Affymetrix
and CATMA microarrays and rice Affymetrix microarrays,
converting probeIDs to Entrez gene identiﬁers. RNAseq data
was reprocessed by importing the raw FASTQ ﬁles (i.e., the ﬁles
containing the nucleotide sequences identiﬁed by the
sequencing machine) into CyVerse [the cloud computing
infrastructure supported through the National Science
Foundation's Directorate of Biological Sciences; (Merchant
et al., 2016)] and then analyzed using a series of software
steps (analysis pipeline) of: HiSAT to ﬁrst generate BAM ﬁles
from the FASTQ ﬁles. BAM, or Binary compressed sequence
Alignment Map ﬁles contain information on the alignment of
each read from the sequencing machine to the genome. BAM
ﬁles were then processed by the BAMtoCounts software
package to create a counts matrix that holds the number of
reads that have mapped to a particular transcript. Finally
differential expression analysis for each transcript was
calculated using the DESeq/EdgeR approach (Love et al.,
2014) as part of the iDEP R-Shiny application. iDEP is a
software package for the R programming language designed
to process genetic data. iDEP uses R-Shiny, a further R software
package that allows for easy development of interactive web-
based applications (Ge et al., 2018). Fragments per kilobase of
transcript per million mapped reads (FPKM) and counts per
million reads mapped (CPM) were calculated as described in
Choi et al. (2019).
We used the TAIR10 annotation that describes genetic loci
within the Arabidopsis thaliana genome sequence (Lamesch
et al., 2012) and the associated genes were linked to Gene
Ontology (GO) molecular function and biological processes
databases that catalog the annotated functions and processes
linked with each genetic locus. These GO descriptions allow
testing of whether genes annotated as being associated with
speciﬁc molecular functions or biological processes are over
represented in a particular dataset (Ashburner et al., 2000;
Carbon et al., 2019). Consensus sub-cellular location
predictions were imported from the SUBA4 subcellular locale
database (Hooper et al., 2017). SUBA4 uses multiple weighted
lines of empirical evidence for protein localization in addition to
aggregating subcellular targeting predictions from >20 programs,
providing a broad-scale survey of likely subcellular association
for the protein product of each transcript. As these databases use
a variety of gene identiﬁers for their indexing, a table was
developed within the Qlik database to translate between these
various identiﬁers and the Entrez indexing within TOAST. This
matrix linked the TAIR AGI with the associated Affymetrix
microarray Probe IDs, RNAseq transcript IDs, along with
associated Ensembl ID [imported from the Ensemble BioMart
plant database; (Zerbino et al., 2018)], Entrez ID and if available,
the Gene Symbols (i.e., the commonly used gene name). Rice cell
culture microarray results from the Shenzhou 8 mission (Kindly
provided by Dr. Peipei Xu, Shanghai Institute of Plant
Physiology and Ecology and Dr. Weiming Cai, Chinese
Academy of Sciences) were also integrated into TOAST. To
allow comparison to the Arabidopsis data, we adopted an
orthologous matrix (OM) database-driven approach. Thus, the
Ensembl genome database project (Kersey et al., 2018) has
developed software to analyze the structure of the genomes of
different organisms to identify genes between species that
originated from a common ancestral gene prior to speciation
[i.e., orthologous genes; (Altenhoff et al., 2018)], allowing
researchers to ask if, e.g., transcriptome responses between
species reﬂect similar patterns of classes of gene expression. To
allow such comparisons within the TOAST database, we needed
to be able to translate rice microarray probe IDs to orthologous
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
5

Arabidopsis gene identiﬁers. We therefore imported the OM
table from Ensembl, i.e., the table that links the rice and
Arabidopsis orthologs through their Ensembl gene IDs. We
then linked the rice microarray probe IDs provided in the
imported rice datasets within this table to their corresponding
Ensemble IDs, allowing mapping between the Arabidopsis and
rice orthologs.
THE TOAST USER INTERFACE
Figure 3 shows the web interface for TOAST, which launches as
an overview menu of dashboard icons. Clicking on the ﬁrst few
dashboards links to introductory materials about space or
Arabidopsis research providing an entry point for the non-
specialist. Most of the remaining icons are links to datasets
from individual experiments. The design of each icon gives
quick visual information on the nature of the experiment
(spacecraft, plant type, hardware, assay type) and clicking on
the icon opens the particular dataset. The ﬁnal set of icons
represent links to online tools that can be used to further analyze
the results emerging from using the TOAST database. The linked
tools are summarized in Supplementary Table 2.
Within TOAST, each dataset is presented to the user as an
interactive dashboard with Log10-fold change and measure of
statistical signiﬁcance (P-value) provided for each locus as shown
in Figure 4. We have used P- rather than Q-value as our initial
metric of signiﬁcance to provide as broad an overview of
signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes as possible. Q-values
are corrected P-values that take into account the cumulative errors
that occur when making multiple tests of signiﬁcance within a
large dataset. The Q-value is available in the downloadable data
tables (see below), allowing users to apply this more stringent
statistical metric as needed. Volcano plots (plots of fold-change
versus statistical signiﬁcance of that change for each gene ID) were
chosen as the main way to visualize both the statistical analysis
and the degree of gene induction or repression. A side table
displays the gene identiﬁer, the gene symbol, the fold-change and
P-value and Q-value for each locus. The user can toggle on and off
the P-value statistical signiﬁcance ﬁlters on the volcano plot to
rapidly assess the strength of the inferences to be drawn from the
results that they are visualizing. All of these data can also be
downloaded and used with a range of other databases that are
linked in the TOAST overview menu (Figure 3). TOAST 4.5
includes a GO database (Ashburner et al., 2000; Carbon et al.,
2019) that provides real time feedback on the ontology of the
subsets of genes selected. Tabs above the interactive bar charts
allow access to four main types of annotation: GO Molecular
function (16,504 categories), GO Cellular component (15,383
categories), GO Biological process (15,644 categories), and
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways [KEGG;
(Kanehisa et al., 2017)]. KEGG is a widely used database that
categorizes genes into the cellular pathways in which they are
involved. In addition, gene selections can be interactively
compared against the AGRIS transcription factor database
[1,851 loci; (Palaniswamy et al., 2006)], the TAIR10 microRNA
database (Lamesch et al., 2012), or be ﬁltered using a selection of
over 60 manually curated gene families. A further selection allows
comparison to known sites of spaceﬂight-induced epigenetic
modiﬁcation (Zhou et al., 2019). These ﬁlters are applied using
a drop-down menu. NCBI PubMed links to any associated
publication are also embedded alongside these data analysis
tools to provide the critical context of the original published
experimental descriptions and analyses (a summary of literature
linked within TOAST is shown in Supplementary Table 1).
These data exploration features were implemented using D3
JavaScript software libraries executed within the Qlik
environment, connecting the spaceﬂight data, its pre-computed
statistics (Figure 2) and information on functional ontology. This
system architecture facilitates user interaction with massive
amounts of data in real time. Thus, as shown in Figure 5, the
user selects a dashboard containing their initial dataset of interest.
The software then allows them to interactively select genes or
groups of genes either manually from the volcano plots, by
ﬁltering using gene ontology terms, or via a text-based interface
as described above. As the user explores the data, they can apply
further rounds of ﬁltering and/or manual selection of groups of
genes. These stacked ﬁlters spawn to all other datasets such that
opening another dashboard of information on another
experiment will show the equivalently ﬁltered results. Further
ﬁltering of these newly opened data will, in turn, ﬁlter back on the
original and all other datasets. This reiterative ﬁltering approach
allows the user to focus on an ever smaller number of genes
selected by comparisons across multiple experiments. These
results can be exported as a spreadsheet and/or passed to other
web-based analytical sites linked within the TOAST interface.
TOAST METADATA APP
A custom metadata app is also incorporated as a tool for use with
TOAST (https://astrobiology.botany.wisc.edu/astrobotany-toast/
tutorial-metadata). This additional relational database provides
data visualization tools that use the metadata associated with
each dataset to ﬁnd associations in factors such as experimental
design parameters, hardware, and features of the spaceﬂight
mission between different experiments in TOAST 4.5. GeneLab
provides a rich array of metadata associated with its datasets.
Most of the other non-GeneLab datasets incorporated into
TOAST do not provide these kinds of metadata summaries
and so we manually curated both the GeneLab and non-
GeneLab datasets within TOAST 4.5 to provide equivalent
metadata for all. These experiment-related factors are
presented in Supplementary Table 3 and drive the
visualizations presented in the metadata app. Figure 6A shows
the main dashboard for the metadata app. Clicking on an icon
launches the associated dashboard where interactive
visualizations can, in turn, ﬁlter on the range of factors that are
presented (Figure 6B). This architecture allows the user to
explore commonalities in the available plant biology data in
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
6

FIGURE 3 | The TOAST 4.5 user interface. (A) The web interface for TOAST launches an overview menu of dashboard icons allowing the user to directly access the
introductory materials, omics data, and related analysis tools. (B) Each icon provides a visual summary of the data or tools that it links to including elements such as
spaceﬂight vehicle (e.g., Shuttle, ISS, Shenzou vs ground-based experimentation), the growth hardware used, plant/seedling vs cell culture experiment, RNAseq vs
microarray vs proteomics, species and ecotype and dataset identiﬁer (e.g., GLDS number).
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
7

FIGURE 4 | Graphical user interface for typical dataset. Clicking on a volcano plot also activates an interactive graphical tool for manual selection of groups of genes
of interest. *Defaults to showing 33.43K, i.e., all Entrez identiﬁers, until a ﬁlter or gene selection is applied. Inset, a lasso tool allows user selection of data points from
volcano plot in addition to activation of ﬁlters such as on signiﬁcance of change, KEGG Pathway, or GO annotation.
FIGURE 5 | Overview of use of the TOAST 4.5 database. (1a) The user selects an initial study of interest and then can review the summary of its metadata to ensure
it is the correct focus for study (1b). The dataset is then opened and (2) when the study is selected an interactive dashboard launches and the user has a direct link
to any associated manuscript. Gene ﬁltering: statistical (3a), gene ontology (3b), and other related functional ﬁlters can be applied to focus the number of loci being
visualized in the volcano plot (3c) to genes of interest. In addition, the volcano plot itself can be interactively manually ﬁltered using a graphical selection tool. All ﬁlters
can be toggled on and off using selectable tabs at the top of the interface (3d). If an interesting subset of loci are selected the user can activate the download option
(4a) and save the related data in word or xml format (4b). (5) The user can also perform further bioinformatic and statistical analysis with other online tools linked from
the main user interface.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
8

TOAST 4.5 ranging from lighting conditions, hardware or plant
age at time of assay to analytical approach and even PI of the
group performing the experiment (See Supplementary Table 3
for comprehensive list of factors). Within the app there are
several places where “ROS meta-analysis variable” appears on the
visualization. This description is used to denote that the data
comes from a published meta-analysis of many publicly available
microarray experiments related to responses to reactive oxygen
species (ROS) called “The ROS-wheel” (Willems et al., 2016).
Thus, for this particular comparative dataset there is not a single
value of, e.g., for light level or plant age (as it is an aggregation of
many individual experiments).
OVERVIEW OF THE PLANT RNASEQ AND
MICROARRAY DATA WITHIN TOAST 4.5
For the RNAseq data in TOAST, 42,220 transcript IDs are
assigned to one of 37,019 distinct TAIR10 gene models.
However, only 33,550 transcripts were detected within the data
imported into TOAST 4.5 as being expressed either on Earth or
during spaceﬂight. For microarrays, TOAST 4.5 links data
gathered from 22,810 Arabidopsis Affymetrix probes IDs, 7,370
CATMA probe IDs, and 75,070 rice probe IDs. For Arabidopsis,
the 42,220 Entrez loci ID's are associated with 13,750 detected
proteins and, if it has been assigned, to one of the 25,270 Gene
Symbols [drawn from the TAIR and ATTED II (Obayashi et al.,
FIGURE 6 | Analysis of metadata within the TOAST 4.5. (A) Initial dashboards allow access to comparisons between a range of experiment-related factors such as
lighting conditions, growth environment, and plant genotypes. (B) A typical dashboard for metadata exploration, in this case for light conditions and age of seedling.
Preset ﬁlters for e.g., lab group performing the research and growth and radiation environments are available to the user and the identity of the ﬁltered datasets is
shown in the bottom left window.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
9

2018) gene databases combined]. For rice, 75,000 Affymetrix
probe IDs are linked to the Arabidopsis Ensembl ID as described
above. Note, in some microarrays a subset of the probes used
have the potential for cross-hybridization and so to report on
multiple gene responses. Similarly, many microarrays have
redundant probes for each gene (e.g., in addition to gene
unique probes, the ATH1 microarray also has 309 probes that
redundantly monitor 148 genes). Where we have imported the
original authors' analyses, we have used their approach to
identifying and ﬁltering these effects. When we had to
reanalyze a dataset to conform to our requirements of
presenting fold-change and P- and Q-values, then where a
probe was identiﬁed as showing potential cross-hybridization
effects, we have assigned a gene ID with both gene identiﬁers.
Thus, e.g., a data point derived from a potentially cross-
hybridizing probe represented on a volcano plot of fold-change
versus signiﬁcance would simultaneously show both gene IDs.
For redundant probes, it is known that these often do not agree
on expression levels (Cui and Loraine, 2009). This is likely due to
the fact that each probe hybridizes to a different point on the
gene and so effects such as differential splicing of that gene will
cause probes to behave differently in the gene expression
analysis. To be as inclusive as possible, the maximum value
amongst each redundant probeset was therefore used.
Most of the microarray data within the TOAST database is
associated with the Affymetrix ATH1 chip, with Illumina-based
RNAseq being the second most regularly used approach. For
these experiments, Arabidopsis seedlings were grown under a
range of growth hardware and lighting conditions. Experiments
in the Biological Research in Canisters (BRICs) produced dark-
grown samples in cassettes (Petri dish ﬁxation units, PDFUs)
that are sealed prior to launch [e.g., (Kwon et al., 2015; Basu et al.,
2017; Johnson et al., 2017; Zupanska et al., 2017; Choi et al.,
2019)]. Light-grown material was produced in the European
Modular Cultivation System [EMCS, with variable RGB lighting
and atmospheric and temperature control, e.g., (Correll et al.,
2013; Herranz et al., 2019; Vandenbrink et al., 2019)], in
SIMBOX [Science in Microgravity Box, LED lighting, e.g.,
(Fengler et al., 2015)], and in Petri dishes under 24 h LED
light in the Veggie hardware [e.g., (Beisel et al., 2019)] or in the
Advanced Biological Research System [ABRS, LED lighting;
(Paul et al., 2013b)]. Both the EMCS and SIMBOX have a
centrifuge, providing the capability for an extremely
informative on-orbit 1 x g control [and for investigating other
fractional g environment, e.g., (Correll et al., 2013; Fengler et al.,
2015)]. The WS ecotype has been grown in the BRIC, ABRS,
Veggie, and in Petri dishes attached to the ISS cabin wall (in both
dim diffuse light and in total darkness). Thus, as data from a wide
range of experiments has been imported into TOAST, it is
important to assess the likely impact of features such as
hardware, tissue samples, and seedling age when making
comparisons between datasets. For example, differences in
atmospheric control and lighting may have important
inﬂuences on plant responses. Thus, plants grown in the BRIC
(darkness, sealed system) might show altered hypoxic response
when compared to those in the EMCS (lighting and atmospheric
control). Careful attention to the parallel ground controls and, if
available, on-orbit centrifuge data are critical to helping
understand the extent of such effects. In addition to hardware
and growth environment, some speciﬁc data features may also
impact user analyses. For example, the Ler-0 ecotype was grown
in both the EMCS and BRIC but the fact that different
microarray technologies [Agilent vs Affymetrix; (Correll et al.,
2013; Johnson et al., 2017)] were used in each study needs to be
taken into account when making comparisons. This is because
results from these different measurement approaches, even when
applied to replicate samples have been reported to differ in some
cases [e.g., (Del Vescovo et al., 2013)]. Similarly, during the
ABRS APEX01 study, Col-0 and WS samples were combined and
then separated into roots, stems, and leaves for transcriptional
analysis (Paul et al., 2013b). Therefore, when using these datasets
allowance for the mixed ecotypes in the sample would need to
be made.
In addition to seedlings, cell cultures have been subjected to
spaceﬂight. Thus, Zupanska et al. (2013) compared Arabidopsis
seedlings and wild type cell cultures grown in the dark within the
BRIC. Subsequent spaceﬂight experiments saw comparisons
between wild-type Arabidopsis cell cultures and those with
mutations in the genes for ALTERED RESPONSE TO
GRAVITY 1 (ARG1; a well-studied Arabidopsis gene related to
gravity sensing) and HEAT SHOCK FACTOR 2a [HSF2a; a key
heat shock response-related transcriptional regulator; (Zupanska
et al., 2017; Zupanska et al., 2019)]. Fengler et al. (2015) also ﬂew
Arabidopsis and rice cell cultures in the SIMBOX hardware on
the Shenzhou-8 spacecraft. Interestingly, despite a large number
of differences in the methodologies used in the preparation of the
Arabidopsis cell cultures between these various experiments
(notably culture age and hardware), TOAST analysis identiﬁes
three genes that are signiﬁcantly differentially expressed in all
sets of experiments (AT5G48560, CRY2-INTERACTING BHLH
2; AT1G73260, KUNITZ TRYPSIN INHIBITOR 1, and
AT2G15220, a basic secretory protein family member). The
sharing of such responses across multiple cell culture
spaceﬂight experiments implies these changes in transcription
may be linked to a common element of the spaceﬂight
environment that impacts a physical factor related to
spaceﬂight at a cellular-level. Facilitating such rapid,
comparative analyses is a major focus of the TOAST
4.5 architecture.
NON-SPACEFLIGHT DATASETS
WITHIN TOAST
Many ground-based analyses are relevant to speciﬁc aspects of
the spaceﬂight environment. Therefore, several non-spaceﬂight
datasets have been added to the TOAST database to aid with
these comparative analyses. Thus, as you move further from the
protection of the Earth's magnetic ﬁeld radiation levels
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
10

experienced by biological systems increase. Studies using ATH1
microarrays that study radiation effects on plants are therefore
also included within TOAST. In these ground-based
experiments, wild-type WS seedlings and mutants
compromised in DNA repair (atm-1, atr-1) were treated with
both gamma photons and high-charge, high-energy (HZE)
radiation and their transcriptional response monitored
(Culligan et al., 2006; Missirian et al., 2014). These studies
provide ﬁngerprints of transcriptional response to both
increased radiation and increasing levels of DNA damage for
comparison to the changes seen in spaceﬂight datasets.
Likewise, data from Arabidopsis cell cultures grown while
either experiencing magnetic levitation or growth on random
positioning machines (Manzano et al., 2012) are also included in
TOAST 4.5. These two techniques have been used to mimic
elements of the spaceﬂight environment such as reduced contact
with the substrate and disruption of directional cues normally
derived from 1 x g on Earth, providing further useful
comparisons to spaceﬂight responses. These gene expression
datasets were obtained using the CATMA microarray
technology and so some care should be taken when making
comparisons to data from experiments using the ATH1
Affymetrix microarray as these two technologies are not
identical and e.g., the data from the CATMA arrays was
analyzed using the slightly older TAIR9 genome annotation to
assign gene IDs (Lamesch et al., 2012).
The BRIC hardware is one of the most widely used plant
growth systems for spaceﬂight and so TOAST also contains a
dataset related to growth of plants in the BRIC hardware on
Earth to help provide context for analyses in that particular piece
of equipment (Basu et al., 2017). Many spaceﬂight samples are
also preserved on orbit in the chemical ﬁxative RNAlater and so
TOAST includes a dataset on the effects of RNAlater on
Arabidopsis seedlings (GLDS-38). In addition, as there are
several spaceﬂight studies that present data on root responses
to spaceﬂight, a root tip transcriptome (Krishnamurthy et al.,
2018) and root tissue gene expression mapping (Birnbaum et al.,
2003) are also included for comparative analyses.
It is important to note that the ground-based studies
incorporated into TOAST are not an exhaustive survey of the
publicly available datasets but are intended as an entry point for
such comparative analysis. A summary of the non-spaceﬂight
datasets incorporated into TOAST 4.5 is presented in
Supplementary Table 1.
TOAST CONFIRMS AND EXTENDS
PREVIOUS TRANSCRIPTOME ANALYSES
Oxidative stress has been highlighted as a likely spaceﬂight-
related response in multiple experiments. Therefore, TOAST 4.5
also includes datasets/dashboards for comparative “ROS wheel”
analyses. The ROS wheel (Willems et al., 2016) is a meta-analysis
of 79 Affymetrix ATH1 microarray studies related to Arabidopsis
redox homeostasis experiments. It provides a comprehensive
overview of ROS and oxidative stress-related transcriptional
signatures, allowing TOAST to ﬁlter for ROS-related events
within spaceﬂight datasets. For example, Choi et al. (2019)
noted the “high light early” oxidative stress signature from the
ROS wheel as a common feature of the responses of Arabidopsis
in the BRIC-19 spaceﬂight experiment. “High light early” is one
of the groupings (clades) of response deﬁned in the ROS wheel
analysis and refers to the common ROS-related transcriptional
signature seen in a set of experiments all exposing plants to a
high light intensity stress for between 30 min and 2 h. Figure 7
shows that reanalysis with TOAST conﬁrms this patterning with
~⅓of the genes signiﬁcantly altered in spaceﬂight in Col-0 in the
BRIC19 experiment also being signiﬁcantly modulated in the
ROS wheel “high light early” response clade. The power of these
comparative approaches is shown using TOAST to perform
similar analyses on other spaceﬂight transcriptomes. Thus, in
(Beisel et al., 2019); the APEX3-2 experiment (GLDS-218; using
the Veggie hardware and Arabidopsis Col-0 ecotype) TOAST
analysis reveals that at 4 days of growth on orbit, 533 of the
signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes in the root in response
to spaceﬂight were also seen in the “high light early” clade of the
ROS wheel. This pattern is reiterated through the time-course of
the experiment (day 8, 295 transcripts and at day 11, 29 in the
root and 265 in the shoot tissues). Analyses across other
spaceﬂight experiments (Supplementary Table 4) shows that
such regulation of “high light early” genes is seen in many ﬂight
experiments using whole seedlings. Interrogation with the
metadata app shows these experiments mostly include plants
grown in the dark, suggesting that while the triggering of a “high
light early” oxidative stress pathway may be a common response
of plant biology to some feature of the spaceﬂight environment,
this is unlikely to be due to high light levels.
CROSS-SPECIES ANALYSES
USING TOAST
TOAST 4.5 also allows for seamless cross-species comparisons
that offer the possibility to reveal fundamental elements of plant
biology response to spaceﬂight. For example, when we used
TOAST to compare the signiﬁcantly differentially expressed
genes in rice cell cultures grown on the Shenzhou 8 spacecraft
with the Arabidopsis cell cultures from the same ﬂight, 483
orthologous loci were identiﬁed (ﬁltering on P-value <0.05, Q-
value < 0.05 and for genes mapping to unique Ensembl gene
Identiﬁers; Supplementary Table 5). The expression of, for
example, genes encoding receptor-like kinases thought to be
involved in response to pathogens were altered in both species,
indicating that spaceﬂight-induced changes in the response
system to biotic stress might be a conserved plant spaceﬂight
response. Importantly, these samples were grown under sterile
conditions on orbit, suggesting these responses were triggered
without pathogen stimulus. In addition, both cell cultures
showed changes in the expression of genes related to cell wall
structure, a theme already highlighted in several reports on
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
11

Arabidopsis seedlings grown in spaceﬂight [e.g., (Choi et al.,
2014; Kwon et al., 2015; Johnson et al., 2017)] and readily
discernable as a transcriptional pattern from TOAST analyses
of these same spaceﬂight samples. Comparison between the
datasets from these cell culture samples grown under
microgravity with those in the 1 x g on-orbit centrifuge control
module within the SIMBOX hardware of this experiment showed
111 of the genes that were signiﬁcantly differentially expressed in
spaceﬂight vs ground controls in both Arabidopsis and rice
cultures were also differentially expressed in the ﬂight vs 1 x g
centrifuge (Supplementary Table 5). That is, these genes were
most likely not responding to the microgravity component of the
spaceﬂight environment (which is nulliﬁed by centrifugation).
Thus, some other feature(s) of spaceﬂight, such as increased
background radiation or the development of microgravity-
induced hypoxia [e.g., (Choi et al., 2019)] may be affecting this
particular response.
TOAST: SURVEY OF SPACEFLIGHT
RESPONSIVE GENES IMPLIES
ALTERATIONS IN MITOCHONDRIAL
FUNCTION
Manual inspection of the subcellular locations presented in the
TOAST interface suggested to us a potentially common element:
mitochondria-related transcripts appeared to often be
signiﬁcantly altered in spaceﬂight samples. Therefore, to more
closely identify possibly conserved spaceﬂight-related changes to
mitochondrial function, 2,290 genes annotated as belonging to
the “mitochondrion” were selected using the “GO subcellular
location” tool embedded in TOAST's graphical user interface as
shown in Figure 8A. Using this ﬁlter, signiﬁcantly differentially
expressed genes (P < 0.05) were acquired from the analyses of
Arabidopsis Col-0 plants grown in space in either light or dark
conditions. In total, 1,233 unique differentially expressed
FIGURE 7 | TOAST conﬁrms the “high light early” ROS response from spaceﬂight data. The “high light early” clade in the ROS wheel analysis represents 8.87K
transcripts from a total of 21.33K transcripts detected, or 41.5% of all transcripts.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
12

mitochondrial genes were identiﬁed from the following light-
grown experiments: root tips in CARA (GLDS-120), roots from
both four and 8 day old seedlings cultivated in APEX-03's Veggie
growth system (GLDS-218), the elongation zones of seedlings
(GLDS-208), and undifferentiated cell cultures ﬂown in
Shenzhou 8's SIMBOX plant growth hardware (Fengler et al.,
2015). Figure 8B shows that of these 1,233 differentially
expressed transcripts, 382 were identiﬁed as being shared
between at least two datasets, with eight genes being shared
across all four experiments (Supplementary Table 5). When
further comparisons were made using different sample times or
assay types as a further distinction within these data (Figure 8C),
only one gene, alternative Oxidase 1A (AOX1A) was found to be
common amongst the signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes
in all conditions of the four selected experiments. These results
suggest analysis of plant mitochondrial functioning during
spaceﬂight may be a fruitful area of research. Indeed, Sugimoto
et al. (2014) previously identiﬁed an alternative oxidase in
mizuna grown on the ISS in the Lada growth chamber (i.e., in
the light) as showing 9.2-fold induction during spaceﬂight. While
the majority of the selected experiments report induction of
AOX1A, instances of repression were also identiﬁed in roots
extracted from four day and 8 day old seedlings grown in APEX-
03's Veggie growth system.
FIGURE 8 | Analysis of mitochondrion-related genes altered by spaceﬂight. (A) Screenshot depicting an example of a user's interaction with the TOAST graphical
user interface to deﬁne mitochondrion-related transcripts. (B) Using TOAST for iterative ﬁltering of differentially expressed genes across multiple spaceﬂight studies
where plants were light grown. (C) More extensive analysis of the studies in (B) using differentiation within the individual datasets for different analytical approaches
(microarray vs RNAseq) and for different analysis periods (4 days vs 8 days). (D) Similar analysis but for dark grown plant samples. (E) The effects of spaceﬂight on
the alternative oxidase gene family in dark grown samples. Maximum likelihood tree of AOX gene family generated using ClustalW alignment with Mega-X software
(www.megasoftware.net). Venn diagrams plotted using jvenn (Bardou et al., 2014).
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
13

Furthermore, AOX1A is signiﬁcantly induced in both the
SIMBOX “Flight Static” vs “Ground Static” analyses (i.e. samples
grown in microgravity compared to ground controls), and in the
‘Flight Centrifuge' vs “Ground Static” comparisons (i.e., plants
grown at 1 x g on orbit vs ground controls not in a centrifuge).
However, no signiﬁcant difference of expression is observed
when comparing the “Flight Static” vs “Flight Centrifuge”
environments. These results highlight the power of being able
to make comparisons to an on-board 1 x g control. The data
suggest that the induction of AOX1A in light-grown
undifferentiated cells is likely not a microgravity-driven event
but reﬂects some other aspect of the spaceﬂight environment,
such as increased radiation exposure, possible development of
hypoxia or altered ﬂuid dynamics.
The datasets chosen for the TOAST analysis above that
highlight AOX1A originate from experiments with samples
grown under light. To explore whether the light environment
might be playing a role in this suite of responses, several “dark-
grown” spaceﬂight studies of the Col-0 ecotype were also selected
using the TOAST metadata app: etiolated seedlings and
undifferentiated cell cultures grown aboard BRIC19 (GLDS-
37), BRIC20 (GLDS-38), BRIC16 (GLDS-17, GLDS-44), and
etiolated root tips extracted from the CARA experiment
(GLDS-120). Comparisons between these datasets revealed no
commonly regulated genes (Figure 8D) and AOX1A was only
signiﬁcantly differentially expressed in the BRIC19 study in this
analysis. Therefore, we examined the spaceﬂight-related
transcriptional responses in the other members of the AOX
gene family (Figure 8E). Indeed, other alternative oxidases are
differentially expressed in these other “dark-grown” experiments,
with each AOX gene being differentially expressed in at least one
selected “dark-grown” study (Figure 8E). Given these altered
expression patterns of members of the AOX family in multiple
experiments, these results suggest that the regulation of
alternative oxidases in response to spaceﬂight-associated
stressors would be a strong candidate for future research studies.
Thus, this analysis in TOAST suggests a potentially
widespread alteration in mitochondrial function in plants
experiencing spaceﬂight, but many questions arise from these
observations.Isanalternativeoxidasepathwaybeingtriggeredby
spaceﬂight stress? Could mitochondrial dysfunction be a
signiﬁcant element in the oxidative stress responses seen in
plant spaceﬂight data, as suggested e.g., for mammalian ocular
tissues(Maoetal.,2013)orosteoblastsexperiencingmicrogravity
(Michaletti et al., 2017)? This kind of comparative data mining
highlights the possibilities for hypothesis generation supported
by the TOAST environment.
However, here it is important to note some of the limitations
inherent in these kinds of analyses. For example, hypoxia is
thought to be imposed during spaceﬂight by local oxygen
consumption and associated depletion around metabolically
active tissues. The reduced convective gas mixing inherent in
microgravity (Porterﬁeld, 2002) then lowers oxygen resupply
leading to development of a depletion zone around these tissues.
Such hypoxic stress would be an obvious potential modulator of
mitochondrial function. Yet, hypoxic signatures do not readily
emerge from GO analysis of the transcript proﬁles of the plant
spaceﬂight datasets, yet hypoxia is a term that GO enrichment
analyses can highlight. Thus, one possibility is that another, yet
to be deﬁned, physical element(s) of the spaceﬂight environment
may act to drive these changes in mitochondrial function.
However, the formation of hypoxic environments due to
microgravity is likely to be very different from how hypoxia
either develops naturally on Earth, or can be experimentally
imposed in ground-based experimentation. For example, the
steep local oxygen depletion zones that form in microgravity
are more likely to be disrupted by convective gas mixing on
Earth. This observation highlights one of the important caveats
of relying strongly on GO analyses to understand spaceﬂight
data. Gene ontology analyses match patterns of gene expression
to those seen under particular conditions on Earth. Therefore,
how well treatments on Earth mimic conditions developing
during spaceﬂight may affect the sensitivity of such GO
analyses for deﬁning these spaceﬂight responses.
Similarly, it is important to ask how much batch effects might
be superimposed on any particular analysis (Leek et al., 2010).
Batch effects are where measurements are impacted by a non-
biological treatment related factor that systematically changes
the measurement. For example, for RNAseq, a batch effect might
be differences in patterns of gene expression related to the day a
particular set of samples was processed for sequencing rather
than the biological treatment of the samples. For microarray
analyses it could be differences imposed by different batches of
microarray being used for different sets of samples. Batch effects
can be complex to resolve but statistical approaches such as
surrogate variable analysis (Leek and Storey, 2007; Leek et al.,
2010) can be used on a case-by-case basis by the researcher to
estimate the sensitivity of a particular dataset's analysis to these
kinds of effects and so help build a case for the robustness of
the analysis.
CONCLUSIONS
As the volume of spaceﬂight omics-level data increases, its power
will lie in researchers' ability to mine both within and across
multiple datasets. Such comparisons will provide an important
source of hypotheses to then be experimentally tested. TOAST
provides a data-rich environment with which to explore the
commonalities and differences in the responses of plants to
spaceﬂight and spaceﬂight-related environments in an
accessible and intuitive format. The TOAST database has been
released as a publicly available, web-based environment (https://
astrobiology.botany.wisc.edu/astrobotany-toast) along with an
online tutorial at https://astrobiology.botany.wisc.edu/
astrobotany-toast/tutorial-metadata. At present, TOAST
provides a tool to aid the plant biology community. However,
the underlying TOAST architecture is biological kingdom
agnostic; through use of orthologous matrix mapping, we are
working to extend TOAST to facilitate similar data exploration
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
14

across the wealth of biological systems that are being analyzed
in spaceﬂight.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets analyzed for this study can be found in the GeneLab
data repository (https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/
projects/) and the Gene Expression Omnibus (https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RB developed the database. RB and KR developed the user
interface and tutorial. RB, JL, and SG analyzed data and wrote
the manuscript.
FUNDING
This research was funded by NASA grants NNX13AM50G,
NNX14AT25G, NNX17AD52G, 80NSSC18K0126,
80NSSC18K0132. The Qlik software used in this work is
provided under a free-to-use educational license from
QlikTech International.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are indebted to Dr. Sarah Swanson for critical
reading of the manuscript and to our many colleagues who
have generously shared their unpublished data. We also thank
the many European Bioinformatics Institute researchers and
numerous beta-testers from around the world whose feedback
has been critical to improving the TOAST environment.
GeneLab datasets were obtained from https://genelab-data.ndc.
nasa.gov/genelab/projects/, maintained by NASA GeneLab,
NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2020.00147/
full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Altenhoff, A. M., Glover, N. M., Train, C. M., Kaleb, K., Warwick Vesztrocy, A.,
Dylus, D., et al. (2018). The OMA orthology database in 2018: retrieving
evolutionary relationships among all domains of life through richer web and
programmatic interfaces. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D477–D485. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkx1019
Anders, S., and Huber, W. (2010). Differential expression analysis for sequence
count data. Genome Biol. 11, R106. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106
Ashburner, M., Ball, C. A., Blake, J. A., Botstein, D., Butler, H., Cherry, J. M., et al.
(2000). Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. Nat. Genet. 25, 25–
29. doi: 10.1038/75556
Austin, R. S., Hiu, S., Waese, J., Ierullo, M., Pasha, A., Wang, T. T., et al. (2016).
New BAR tools for mining expression data and exploring Cis-elements in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J. 88, 490–504. doi: 10.1111/tpj.13261
Bardou, P., Mariette, J., Escudié, F., Djemiel, C., and Klopp, C. (2014). Jvenn: an
interactive Venn diagram viewer. BMC Bioinf. 15, 293. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2105-15-293
Barrett, T., Wilhite, S. E., Ledoux, P., Evangelista, C., Kim, I. F., Tomashevsky, M.,
et al. (2013). NCBI GEO: archive for functional genomics data sets - update.
Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D991–D995. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1193
Basu, P., Kruse, C. P. S., Luesse, D. R., and Wyatt, S. E. (2017). Growth in
spaceﬂight hardware results in alterations to the transcriptome and proteome.
Life Sci. Sp. Res. 15, 88–96. doi: 10.1016/j.lssr.2017.09.001
Beisel, N. S., Noble, J., Barbazuk, W. B., Paul, A. L., and Ferl, R. J. (2019).
Spaceﬂight-induced alternative splicing during seedling development in
Arabidopsis thaliana. NPJ Microgravity 5, 9. doi: 10.1038/s41526-019-0070-7
Berardini, T. Z., Reiser, L., Li, D., Mezheritsky, Y., Muller, R., Strait, E., et al. (2015). The
Arabidopsis information resource: making and mining the “gold standard”
annotated reference plant genome. Genesis 53, 474–485. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22877
Birnbaum, K., Shasha, D. E., Wang, J. Y., Jung, J. W., Lambert, G. M., Galbraith, D. W.,
et al. (2003). A gene expression map of the Arabidopsis root. Sci. (80-). 302, 1956–
1960. doi: 10.1126/science.1090022
Carbon, S., Douglass, E., Dunn, N., Good, B., Harris, N. L., Lewis, S. E., et al.
(2019). The gene ontology resource: 20 years and still GOing strong. Nucleic
Acids Res. 47, D330–D338. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1055
Choi, W.-G., Toyota, M., Kim, S.-H., Hilleary, R., and Gilroy, S. (2014). Salt stress-
induced Ca2+ waves are associated with rapid, long-distance root-to-shoot
signaling in plants. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 6497–6502. doi: 10.1073/
PNAS.1319955111
Choi, W. G., Barker, R. J., Kim, S. H., Swanson, S. J., and Gilroy, S. (2019).
Variation in the transcriptome of different ecotypes of Arabidopsis thaliana
reveals signatures of oxidative stress in plant responses to spaceﬂight. Am. J.
Bot. 106, 123–136. doi: 10.1002/ajb2.1223
Correll, M. J., Pyle, T. P., Millar, K. D. L., Sun, Y., Yao, J., Edelmann, R. E., et al.
(2013). Transcriptome analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings grown in
space: implications for gravity-responsive genes. Planta. 238, 519–533.
doi: 10.1007/s00425-013-1909-x
Cui, X., and Loraine, A. E. (2009). Consistency analysis of redundant probe sets on
affymetrix three-prime expression arrays and applications to differential mRNA
processing. PloS One 4, e4229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004229
Culligan, K. M., Robertson, C. E., Foreman, J., Doerner, P., and Britt, A. B. (2006).
ATR and ATM play both distinct and additive roles in response to ionizing
radiation. Plant J. 48, 947–961. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02931.x
Del Vescovo, V., Meier, T., Inga, A., Denti, M. A., and Borlak, J. (2013). A cross-
platform comparison of Affymetrix and Agilent microarrays reveals discordant
miRNA expression in lung tumors of c-Raf transgenic mice. PloS One 8,
e78870. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078870
Fabregat, A., Jupe, S., Matthews, L., Sidiropoulos, K., Gillespie, M., Garapati, P.,
et al. (2018). The Reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res. 46,
D649–D655. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1132
Fengler, S., Spirer, I., Neef, M., Ecke, M., Nieselt, K., and Hampp, R. (2015). A
whole-genome microarray study of Arabidopsis thaliana semisolid callus
cultures exposed to microgravity and nonmicrogravity related spaceﬂight
conditions for 5 days on board of Shenzhou 8. BioMed. Res. Int. 2015,
547495. doi: 10.1155/2015/547495
Ferl, R. J., Koh, J., Denison, F., and Paul, A. L. (2015). Spaceﬂight induces speciﬁc
alterations in the proteomes of Arabidopsis. Astrobiology 15, 32–56.
doi: 10.1089/ast.2014.1210
Franz, M., Rodriguez, H., Lopes, C., Zuberi, K., Montojo, J., Bader, G. D., et al.
(2018). GeneMANIA update 2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, W60–W64.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gky311
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
15

Gagnot, S., Tamby, J. P., Martin-Magniette, M. L., Bitton, F., Taconnat, L.,
Balzergue, S., et al. (2008). CATdb: a public access to Aabidopsis
transcriptome data from the URGV-CATMA platform. Nucleic Acids Res.
36, D986–D900. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm757
Ge, S. X., Son, E. W., and Yao, R. (2018). iDEP: an integrated web application for
differential expression and pathway analysis of RNA-Seq data. BMC Bioinf. 19,
534. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-2486-6
GeneLab (2019). The Genelab data repository. Available at: https://genelab-data.
ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/projects/[Accessed October 8, 2019].
Goff, S. A., Vaughn, M., McKay, S., Lyons, E., Stapleton, A. E., Gessler, D., et al.
(2011). The iPlant collaborative: cyberinfrastructure for plant biology. Front.
Plant Sci. 2, 34. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2011.00034
Herranz, R., Vandenbrink, J. P., Villacampa, A., Manzano, A., Poehlman, W. L.,
Feltus, F. A., et al. (2019). RNAseq analysis of the response of Arabidopsis
thaliana to fractional gravity under blue-light stimulation during spaceﬂight.
Front. Plant Sci. 10, 1529. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2019.01529
Hooper, C. M., Castleden, I. R., Tanz, S. K., Aryamanesh, N., and Millar, A. H. (2017).
SUBA4: The interactive data analysis centre for Arabidopsis subcellular protein
locations. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D1064–D1074. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1041
Hruz, T., Laule, O., Szabo, G., Wessendorp, F., Bleuler, S., Oertle, L., et al. (2008).
Genevestigator V3: a reference expression database for the meta-analysis of
transcriptomes. Adv. Bioinf. 2008, 420747. doi: 10.1155/2008/420747
Irizarry, R. A., Hobbs, B., Collin, F., Beazer-Barclay, Y. D., Antonellis, K. J., Scherf, U.,
et al. (2003). Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high density
oligonucleotide array probe level data. Biostatistics 4, 249–264. doi: 10.1093/
biostatistics/4.2.249
Jin, J., Chen, H., and Cai, W. (2015). Transcriptome analysis of Oryza sativa calli
under microgravity. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 27, 437–453. doi: 10.1007/
s12217-015-9432-2
Johnson, C. M., Subramanian, A., Pattathil, S., Correll, M. J., and Kiss, J. Z. (2017).
Comparative transcriptomics indicate changes in cell wall organization and
stress response in seedlings during spaceﬂight. Am. J. Bot. 104, 1219–1231.
doi: 10.3732/ajb.1700079
Kanehisa, M., Furumichi, M., Tanabe, M., Sato, Y., and Morishima, K. (2017).
KEGG: new perspectives on genomes, pathways, diseases and drugs. Nucleic
Acids Res. 45, D353–D361. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkw1092
Kaul, S., Koo, H. L., Jenkins, J., Rizzo, M., Rooney, T., Tallon, L. J., et al. (2000).
Analysis of the genome sequence of the ﬂowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
Nature 408, 796–815. doi: 10.1038/35048692
Kersey, P. J., Allen, J. E., Allot, A., Barba, M., Boddu, S., Bolt, B. J., et al. (2018).
Ensembl Genomes 2018: an integrated omics infrastructure for non-vertebrate
species. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D802–D808. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1011
Krishnakumar, V., Contrino, S., Cheng, C.-Y., Belyaeva, I., Ferlanti, E. S., Miller, J. R.,
et al. (2016). ThaleMine: a warehouse for Arabidopsis data integration and
discovery. Plant Cell Physiol. 58, 200. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcw200
Krishnamurthy, A., Ferl, R. J., and Paul, A. L. (2018). Comparing RNA-Seq and
microarray gene expression data in two zones of the Arabidopsis root apex
relevant to spaceﬂight. Appl. Plant Sci. 6, e01197. doi: 10.1002/aps3.1197
Kwon, T., Alan Sparks, J., Nakashima, J., Allen, S. N., Tang, Y., and Blancaﬂor, E.
B. (2015). Transcriptional response of Arabidopsis seedlings during spaceﬂight
reveals peroxidase and cell wall remodeling genes associated with root hair
development. Am. J. Bot. 102, 21–35. doi: 10.3732/ajb.1400458
Lamesch, P., Berardini, T. Z., Li, D., Swarbreck, D., Wilks, C., Sasidharan, R., et al.
(2012).TheArabidopsisInformationResource(TAIR):improvedgeneannotation
and new tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D1202–D1210. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1090
Leek, J. T., and Storey, J. D. (2007). Capturing heterogeneity in gene expression
studies by surrogate variable analysis. PloS Genet. 3, e161. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pgen.0030161
Leek, J. T., Scharpf, R. B., Bravo, H. C., Simcha, D., Langmead, B., Johnson, W. E.,
et al. (2010). Tackling the widespread and critical impact of batch effects in
high-throughput data. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 10. doi: 10.1038/nrg2825
Li, H. S., Lu, J. Y., Zhao, H., Sun, Q., Yu, F. T., Pan, Y., et al. (2017). The impact of
space environment on gene expression in Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings. Sci.
China Technol. Sci. 60, 902–910. doi: 10.1007/s11431-016-0232-7
Love, M. I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550.
doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8
Maglott, D., Ostell, J., Pruitt, K. D., and Tatusova, T. (2011). Entrez gene: gene-
centered information at NCBI. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, D52–D57. doi: 10.1093/
nar/gkq1237
Manzano, A. I., van Loon, J. J. W. A., Christianen, P. C. M., Gonzalez-Rubio, J. M.,
Medina, F. J., and Herranz, R. (2012). Gravitational and magnetic ﬁeld
variations synergize to cause subtle variations in the global transcriptional
state of Arabidopsis in vitro callus cultures. BMC Genomics 13, 105.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-105
Mao, X. W., Pecaut, M. J., Stodieck, L. S., Ferguson, V. L., Bateman, T. A.,
Bouxsein, M., et al. (2013). Spaceﬂight environment induces mitochondrial
oxidative damage in ocular tissue. Radiat. Res. 180, 340–350. doi: 10.1667/
rr3309.1
Massa, G. D., Dufour, N. F., Carver, J. A., Hummerick, M. E., Wheeler, R. M.,
Morrow, R. C., et al. (2017). VEG-01: Veggie hardware validation testing on the
International Space Station. Open Agric. 2, 33–41. doi: 10.1515/opag-2017-
0003
Mazars, C., Brière, C., Grat, S., Pichereaux, C., Rossignol, M., Pereda-Loth, V., et al.
(2014). Microgravity induces changes in microsome-associated proteins of
Arabidopsis seedlings grown on board the International Space Station. PloS
One 9, e91814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091814
Merchant, N., Lyons, E., Goff, S., Vaughn, M., Ware, D., Micklos, D., et al. (2016).
The iPlant Collaborative: cyberinfrastructure for enabling data to discovery for
the life sciences. PloS Biol. 14, e1002342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002342
Michaletti, A., Gioia, M., Tarantino, U., and Zolla, L. (2017). Effects of
microgravity on osteoblast mitochondria: a proteomic and metabolomics
proﬁle. Sci. Rep. 7, 15376. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-15612-1
Missirian, V., Conklin, P. A., Culligan, K. M., Huefner, N. D., and Britt, A. B.
(2014). High atomic weight, high-energy radiation (HZE) induces
transcriptional responses shared with conventional stresses in addition to a
core “DSB” response speciﬁc to clastogenic treatments. Front. Plant Sci. 5, 364.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00364
Obayashi, T., Aoki, Y., Tadaka, S., Kagaya, Y., and Kinoshita, K. (2018). ATTED-II
in 2018: a plant coexpression database based on investigation of the statistical
property of the mutual rank index. Plant Cell Physiol. 59, e3. doi: 10.1093/pcp/
pcx191
Palaniswamy, S. K., James, S., Sun, H., Lamb, R. S., Davuluri, R. V., and Grotewold, E.
(2006). AGRIS and AtRegNet. A platform to link cis-regulatory elements and
transcription factors into regulatory networks. Plant Physiol. 140, 818–829.
doi: 10.1104/pp.105.072280
Papatheodorou, I., Fonseca, N.A., Keays, M.,Tang, Y.A., Barrera, E., Bazant,W., et al.
(2018). Expression atlas: gene and protein expression across multiple studies and
organisms. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D246–D251. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1158
Paul, A. L., Zupanska, A. K., Ostrow, D. T., Zhang, Y., Sun, Y., Li, J. L., et al. (2012).
Spaceﬂight transcriptomes: unique responses to a novel environment.
Astrobiology 12, 40–56. doi: 10.1089/ast.2011.0696
Paul, A. L., Wheeler, R. M., Levine, H. G., and Fer, R. J. (2013a). Fundamental
plant biology enabled by the space shuttle. Am. J. Bot. 100, 226–234.
doi: 10.3732/ajb.1200338
Paul, A. L., Zupanska, A. K., Schultz, E. R., and Ferl, R. J. (2013b). Organ-speciﬁc
remodeling of the Arabidopsis transcriptome in response to spaceﬂight. BMC
Plant Biol. 13, 112. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-112
Paul, A. L., Sng, N. J., Zupanska, A. K., Krishnamurthy, A., Schultz, E. R., and Ferl,
R. J. (2017). Genetic dissection of the Arabidopsis spaceﬂight transcriptome:
are some responses dispensable for the physiological adaptation of plants to
spaceﬂight? PloS One 12, e0180186. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0180186
Porterﬁeld, D. M. (2002). The biophysical limitations in physiological transport
and exchange in plants grown in microgravity. J. Plant Growth Regul. 21, 177–
190. doi: 10.1007/s003440010054
Preu, P., and Braun, M. (2014). German SIMBOX on Chinese mission Shenzhou-
8: Europe's ﬁrst bilateral cooperation utilizing China's Shenzhou programme.
Acta Astronaut. 94, 584–591. doi: 10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.08.022
Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J., and Smyth, G. K. (2009). edgeR: a bioconductor
package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data.
Bioinformatics 26, 139–140. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp616
Salmi, M. L., and Roux, S. J. (2008). Gene expression changes induced by space
ﬂight in single-cells of the fern Ceratopteris richardii. Planta 229, 151–159.
doi: 10.1007/s00425-008-0817-y
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
16

Sclep, G., Allemeersch, J., Liechti, R., De Meyer, B., Beynon, J., Bhalerao, R., et al.
(2007). CATMA, a comprehensive genome-scale resource for silencing and
transcript proﬁling of Arabidopsis genes. BMC Bioinf. 8, 400. doi: 10.1186/
1471-2105-8-400
Sugimoto, M., Oono, Y., Gusev, O., Matsumoto, T., Yazawa, T., Levinskikh, M. A.,
et al. (2014). Genome-wide expression analysis of reactive oxygen species gene
network in Mizuna plants grown in long-term spaceﬂight. BMC Plant Biol. 14,
4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-14-4
Sullivan, A., Purohit, P. K., Freese, N. H., Pasha, A., Esteban, E., Waese, J., et al.
(2019). An ‘ eFP -Seq Browser' for visualizing and exploring RNA sequencing
data. Plant J. 100, 641–654. doi: 10.1111/tpj.14468
Szklarczyk, D., Gable, A. L., Lyon, D., Junge, A., Wyder, S., Huerta-Cepas, J., et al.
(2019). STRING v11: protein–protein association networks with increased
coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental
datasets. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D607–D613. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1131
Touﬁghi, K., Brady, S. M., Austin, R., Ly, E., and Provart, N. J. (2005). The botany
array resource: e-Northerns, expression angling, and promoter analyses. Plant
J. 43, 153–163. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02437.x
Vandenbrink, J. P., and Kiss, J. Z. (2016). Space, the ﬁnal frontier: a critical review
of recent experiments performed in microgravity. Plant Sci. 243, 115–119.
doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2015.11.004
Vandenbrink, J. P., Herranz, R., Poehlman, W. L., Feltus, F. A., Ciska, M., Medina, F. J.,
et al. (2019). RNA-seq analyses of Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings after exposure to
blue-light phototropic stimuli in microgravity. Am. J. Bot. 106, 1466–1476. doi:
10.1002/ajb2.1384
Waese, J., Fan, J., Pasha, A., Yu, H., Fucile, G., Shi, R., et al. (2017). ePlant:
visualizing and exploring multiple levels of data for hypothesis generation in
plant biology. Plant Cell 29, 1806–1821. doi: 10.1105/tpc.17.00073
Wheeler, R. M. (2017). Agriculture for space: people and places paving the way.
Open Agric. 2, 14–32. doi: 10.1515/opag-2017-0002
Willems, P., Mhamdi, A., Stael, S., Storme, V., Kerchev, P., Noctor, G., et al. (2016).
The ROS wheel: reﬁning ROS transcriptional footprints. Plant Physiol. 17,
1720–1733. doi: 10.1104/pp.16.00420
Zerbino, D. R., Achuthan, P., Akanni, W., Amode, M. R., Barrell, D., Bhai, J., et al.
(2018). Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D754–D761. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx1098
Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Xie, J., and Zheng, H. (2015). Differential protein expression
proﬁling of Arabidopsis thaliana callus under microgravity on board the
Chinese SZ-8 spacecraft. Planta 241, 475–488. doi: 10.1007/s00425-014-
2196-x
Zhou, M., Sng, N. J., Lefrois, C. E., Paul, A. L., and Ferl, R. J. (2019).
Epigenomics in an extraterrestrial environment: organ-speciﬁc alteration
of DNA methylation and gene expression elicited by spaceﬂight in
Arabidopsis thaliana. BMC Genomics 20, 205. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-
5554-z
Zupanska, A. K., Denison, F. C., Ferl, R. J., and Paul, A. L. (2013). Spaceﬂight
engages heat shock protein and other molecular chaperone genes in tissue
culture cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. Am. J. Bot. 100, 235–248. doi: 10.3732/
ajb.1200343
Zupanska, A. K., Schultz, E. R., Yao, J., Sng, N. J., Zhou, M., Callaham, J. B., et al.
(2017). ARG1 functions in the physiological adaptation of undifferentiated
plant cells to spaceﬂight. Astrobiology 17, 1077–1111. doi: 10.1089/
ast.2016.1538
Zupanska, A. K., Lefrois, C., Ferl, R. J., and Paul, A. L. (2019). HSFA2 functions in
the physiological adaptation of undifferentiated plant cells to spaceﬂight. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 20, E390. doi: 10.3390/ijms20020390
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Barker, Lombardino, Rasmussen and Gilroy. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
17

APPENDIX
Acronym/
term
Name
Deﬁnition
Reference
ABRS
Advanced
Biological
Research
System
NASA on-orbit growth facility
that provided LED lighting and
sample photography
(Paul et al.,
2012; Paul
et al., 2013b)
Affymetrix
microarray
–
Microarray to monitor patterns
of gene expression produced
by Affymetrix Inc.
–
AGI
Arabidopsis
Gene Initiative
Consortium of researchers
studying the genome of
Arabidopsis thaliana
(Kaul et al.,
2000)
AGRIS
AtTFD
AGRIS
Arabidopsis
Transcription
Factor
database
A searchable database of
~1770 Arabidopsis thaliana
transcription factors grouped
into families by conserved
domain structures. Maintained
by The Arabidopsis Gene
Regulatory Information Server
(AGRIS).
(Palaniswamy
et al., 2006)
ATTED II
Arabidopsis
thaliana trans-
factor and cis-
element
prediction
database
A database cataloging plant
gene co-expression data
(Obayashi et al.,
2018)
BAM
Binary
compressed
sequence
Alignment Map
A ﬁle containing information on
the alignment of each read
from a DNA sequencing
machine to the genome of a
target organism
–
BRIC
Biological
Research in
Canister
Spaceﬂight hardware allowing
for plant growth on orbit.
Samples are sealed prior to
launch. Lighting provided only
in the BRIC-LED version
CATdb
–
A repository of transcriptome
data for Arabidopsis thaliana
produced by the Complete
Arabidopsis Transcriptome
Micro Array (CATMA) platform
(Gagnot et al.,
2008)
CATMA
microarray
Complete
Arabidopsis
Transcript
MicroArray
Microarray to monitor patterns
of gene expression using
technology developed by the
European CATMA initiative.
(Sclep et al.,
2007; Gagnot
et al., 2008)
CPM
counts per
million reads
mapped
In RNAseq: the counts of
number of reads per gene
scaled to the number of
fragments sequenced. Unlike
FPKM (see below), this value is
not normalized for the effects of
gene length or amount of
sequencing on count number
per gene.
–
CyVerse
–
A cloud computing
infrastructure supported
through the National Science
Foundation's Directorate of
Biological Sciences.
(Goff et al.,
2011; Merchant
et al., 2016)
D3
JavaScript
–
A library of routines for the
Javascript programming
–
(Continued)
Continued
Acronym/
term
Name
Deﬁnition
Reference
language that enables
interactive data visualizations
within a web browser.
DESeq
–
An analysis tool for calculating
differential gene expression.
(Anders and
Huber, 2010;
Love et al.,
2014)
EdgeR
Empirical
analysis of
Digital Gene
Expression in
R
An analysis tool calculating
differential gene expression.
(Robinson et al.,
2009; Love
et al., 2014)
eFP-Seq
Browser
–
An RNA-seq data exploration
and visualization tool.
(Sullivan et al.,
2019)
EMBL EBI
Expression
atlas
–
A database of patterns of gene
expression under different
conditions. Maintained by The
European Molecular Biology
Laboratory's (EMBL) European
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI).
(Papatheodorou
et al., 2018)
EMCS
European
Modular
Cultivation
System
On-orbit growth hardware
developed by the European
Space Agency. Provides an
on-board centrifuge, video and
lighting, temperature and
atmospheric control.
(Correll et al.,
2013; Mazars
et al., 2014;
Vandenbrink
et al., 2019)
Ensembl
–
A database of genome-related
information maintained by the
European Bioinformatics
Institute and the Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute,
(Kersey et al.,
2018; Zerbino
et al., 2018)
Entrez
–
The US National Center for
Biotechnology Information
(NCBI)'s database for gene-
speciﬁc information
(Maglott et al.,
2011)
ePlant
–
A portal that provides access
to multiple web services to
download genome-level data
on plant genes.
(Waese et al.,
2017)
Expression
Angler
–
A tool that ﬁnds other genes
with similar expression patterns
to a gene of interest.
(Austin et al.,
2016)
FASTQ ﬁle
–
File containing the nucleotide
sequences identiﬁed by next
generation nucleotide
sequencing machines
–
FPKM
Fragments Per
Kilobase of
transcript per
Million
mapped reads
An estimation of gene
expression based on RNA-
sequencing data that is
normalizing for gene length and
the amount of sequencing
(longer and more heavily
sequenced genes will naturally
produce more reads
independent of their expression
level).
–
Gene
Symbol
–
Commonly used gene name
such as AOX1A to denote the
Arabidopsis gene
ALTERNATIVE OXIDASE 1A
–
GeneLab
–
A repository for spaceﬂight-
related ‘omics-level data
–
(Continued)
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
18

Continued
Acronym/
term
Name
Deﬁnition
Reference
administered by the US
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA).
Genemania
Gene Multiple
Association
Network
Integration
Algorithm
A tool that generates a single
functional interaction network
for a gene of interest drawing
on multiple data sources.
(Franz et al.,
2018)
Genevisble
–
A search portal to curated
expression data from the
GENEVESTIGATOR database
(Hruz et al.,
2008)
GEO
Gene
Expression
Omnibus
A functional genomics data
repository administered by US
National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI).
–
GLDS
GeneLab
Dataset
Unique identiﬁer of a dataset
(usually microarray, RNAseq or
proteomics data) deposited in
NASA's GeneLab data
repository
–
GO
Gene
Ontology
Descriptive terms drawn from a
standard set that classify genes
dependent on their
relationships to biological
processes or functions or
subcellular locales.
(Ashburner
et al., 2000;
Carbon et al.,
2019)
GO
Enrichment
analysis
Gene
Ontology
Enrichment
analysis
Statistical analysis of dataset as
to whether there is an over-
representation of genes
associated with a particular
biological process or function,
or cellular locale relative to that
expected from a random
selection of the same number
of genes.
(Ashburner
et al., 2000;
Carbon et al.,
2019)
HZE
–
High-charge, high-energy
radiation.
–
iDEP
integrated
Differential
Expression
and Pathway
analysis
Software package for the R
programming language
designed to process genetic
data.
(Ge et al., 2018)
KEGG
Kyoto
Encyclopedia
of Genes and
Genomes
A widely used database that
categorizes genes into the
cellular pathways in which they
are involved.
(Kanehisa et al.,
2017)
Metadata
–
Additional data about
parameters and conditions that
adds to the description of each
experiment and provides
context for interpreting results.
–
microRNA
annotation
TAIR10
–
A database of microRNAs
predicted in the genome of
Arabidopsis thaliana from the
TAIR 10 genome annotation.
(Lamesch et al.,
2012)
NCBI
The National
Center for
Biotechnology
Information
Part of the National Library of
Medicine that is run by the US
National Institutes of Health.
This unit maintains a series of
databases relevant to biological
research
–
(Continued)
Continued
Acronym/
term
Name
Deﬁnition
Reference
NCBI
PubMed
–
Online aggregator of scientiﬁc
publications curated by NCBI
–
OM
Orthologous
Matrix
A table linking gene identiﬁers
in one species to orthologous
genes in a different species
Ortholog
–
Related genes between
species that originated from a
common ancestral gene prior
to speciation
–
P-value vs
Q-value
–
In transcriptomics: P-value is
the statistical signiﬁcance that a
gene is differentially expressed
when comparing between
treatments; Q-value is an
adjusted P-value, taking in to
account the cumulative effect
of making multiple
comparisons (tests of
signiﬁcance) within a dataset,
such as across many genes.
Promomer
–
A tool for identifying promoter
elements
(Touﬁghi et al.,
2005)
Qlik
–
Database management
software
–
R
–
Programming language widely
used in the statistical analysis
of scientiﬁc data.
–
R-Shiny
–
An R software package that
allows for easy development of
interactive web-based
applications.
–
R-studio
–
Commercially produced
software that aids with the
development of programs
using R.
–
Reactome
–
A curated and peer-reviewed
molecular pathway database
(Fabregat et al.,
2018)
RMA
Robust Multi-
array Average
An algorithm used to normalize
microarray data between
multiple microarray chips
(Irizarry et al.,
2003)
RNA-seq
–
High-throughput sequencing of
RNA.
–
ROS-wheel
–
A meta-analysis of many
publicly available microarray
experiments related to
responses to reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and oxidative
stress.
(Willems et al.,
2016)
SIMBOX
Science In
Microgravity
BOX
An on-orbit experiment facility
developed by the German
Aerospace Center's (DLR)
Space Administration. Contains
an internal centrifuge and
lighting and temperature
control.
(Preu and
Braun, 2014)
STRING
–
A database and web tool for
visualizing protein:protein
interaction networks.
(Szklarczyk
et al., 2019)
SUBA4
The
SUBcellular
location
Database of predicted
subcellular locations for a given
gene product.
(Hooper et al.,
2017)
(Continued)
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
19

Continued
Acronym/
term
Name
Deﬁnition
Reference
database for
Arabidopsis
TAIR
The
Arabidopsis
Information
Resource
A database of genetic and
molecular biology data focused
on Arabidopsis thaliana
(Berardini et al.,
2015)
TAIR9/
TAIR10
The
Arabidopsis
Genome
Annotation
Version 9 or
10
Annotated versions of the
sequenced Arabidopsis
genome produced by TAIR.
Each successive version has
used newer information to
improve the annotation of the
entire genome.
–
Thalemine
–
A data warehouse aggregating
many genomic tools and datasets
for Arabidopsis thaliana.
(Krishnakumar
et al., 2016)
(Continued)
Continued
Acronym/
term
Name
Deﬁnition
Reference
TOAST
Test Of
Arabidopsis
Space
Transcriptome
database
A relational database that
compares plant biology,
spaceﬂight-related omics
datasets and their associated
metadata.
–
Veggie
–
NASA's Vegetable Production
System; an ISS-based growth
hardware providing LED
lighting.
(Massa et al.,
2017)
Volcano
plot
A scatter plot of data. For the
microarray and RNAseq data in
TOAST the volcano plot
presents fold-change per gene
ID plotted versus statistical
signiﬁcance for each data
point.
Barker et al.
Test of Arabidopsis Space Transcriptome
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org
March 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 147
20
