Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00792-021-01253-w
REVIEW
The smallest space miners: principles of space biomining
Rosa Santomartino1 · Luis Zea2 · Charles S. Cockell1
Received: 2 August 2021 / Accepted: 9 December 2021 / Published online: 6 January 2022 
© The Author(s) 2021
Abstract
As we aim to expand human presence in space, we need to find viable approaches to achieve independence from terrestrial 
resources. Space biomining of the Moon, Mars and asteroids has been indicated as one of the promising approaches to 
achieve in-situ resource utilization by the main space agencies. Structural and expensive metals, essential mineral nutrients, 
water, oxygen and volatiles could be potentially extracted from extraterrestrial regolith and rocks using microbial-based 
biotechnologies. The use of bioleaching microorganisms could also be applied to space bioremediation, recycling of waste 
and to reinforce regenerative life support systems. However, the science around space biomining is still young. Relevant 
differences between terrestrial and extraterrestrial conditions exist, including the rock types and ores available for mining, 
and a direct application of established terrestrial biomining techniques may not be a possibility. It is, therefore, necessary 
to invest in terrestrial and space-based research of specific methods for space applications to learn the effects of space 
conditions on biomining and bioremediation, expand our knowledge on organotrophic and community-based bioleaching 
mechanisms, as well as on anaerobic biomining, and investigate the use of synthetic biology to overcome limitations posed 
by the space environments.
Keywords  Space biomining · ISRU · Space bioleaching · BLSS · Space microbiology · Bioremediation · Space 
sustainability
Abbreviations
BLSS	 Biological life support system
EPS	
Extracellular polymeric substances
GCR​	
Galactic cosmic rays
ISRU	
In-situ resource utilization
ISS	
International Space Station
PGE	
Platinum group elements
REEs	
Rare earth elements
SEP	
Solar energetic particles
Introduction
As the goal for human space exploration moves farther from 
Earth, relying on a constant resupply of resources from Earth 
becomes less viable. In-situ resource utilization (ISRU) 
approaches have the aim of enabling sustainable exploration 
and settlement of space, by mitigating the need of importing 
goods and materials from Earth (NASA-ASEE 1992; Anand 
et al. 2012; Montague et al. 2012; Menezes et al. 2015b; 
Verseux et al. 2016). Microbial-based biotechnologies and 
biomanufacturing approaches have demonstrated their high 
efficacy in several applications and may become a key com-
ponent of future ISRU strategies (Brown et al. 2008; Slenzka 
and Kempf 2010; Montague et al. 2012; Verseux et al. 2016; 
Nangle et al. 2020; Volponi and Lasseur 2020; Berliner et al. 
2021; Castelein et al. 2021; Keller et al. 2021). Minerals and 
metals will be necessary resources for construction, infra-
structure and manufacturing. Water, oxygen, volatiles, essen-
tial nutrients for human nutrition and soil fertilization, are all 
elements which will be essential to establish self-sufficient 
settlements, and that could be obtained from extraterrestrial 
rocks (Cockell 2011). Mining of these resources will there-
fore be a priority for an extraterrestrial settlement.
Communicated by G. Antranikian.
 *	 Rosa Santomartino 
	
rosa.santomartino@ed.ac.uk
1	
UK Centre for Astrobiology, School of Physics 
and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh EH9 3FD, UK
2	
BioServe Space Technologies, University of Colorado 
Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 2 of 19
Microorganisms can be applied to these needs, extract-
ing useful elements by a technique called biomining or 
bioleaching. Currently on Earth around 20–25% of cop-
per and 5% of gold are extracted using biomining (John-
son et al. 2013). Bioleaching can provide economic and 
environmental advantages compared to other methods 
(Srichandan et al. 2019) and can be used as a complemen-
tary technique to extract trace metals from mine waste, or 
recover low-grade ores which cannot be treated by con-
ventional methods (Bosecker 1997). Mining processes 
produce an enormous amount of waste low-grade rock 
material and mill tailings, which often still contain useful 
trace elements that cannot be further recovered by tradi-
tional methods. However, these can be accessible to small 
microbial cells, as an effect of specific types of metabo-
lism (Blowes et al. 2003; Schippers et al. 2013; Johnson 
2014; Jerez 2017a). With the same principle, bioleach-
ing techniques can be applied to the recycling of useful 
metals from secondary solid waste (Schippers et al. 2013; 
Johnson 2014; Jerez 2017b). A good example is provided 
by the recovery of rare earth elements (REEs, Reed et al. 
2016) or copper from electronic waste (Srichandan et al. 
2019).
Many advantages of biomining over traditional tech-
niques on Earth also apply to space. For instance, biomin-
ing generally requires lower energy compared to traditional 
mining (Schippers et al. 2013), which will be an advantage 
in space, where resources are limited and many engineering 
constraints may be in place. Nevertheless, space conditions 
and available rock materials are different from those present 
on Earth and which are commonly used in terrestrial biomin-
ing. On one hand, traditional autotrophic and chemolitho-
trophic microbes used for terrestrial biomining do not need 
to rely on organic compounds as nutrients, which are very 
scarce in extraterrestrial environments, to grow (Johansson 
1992; Fahrion et al. 2021). On the other hand, rocks present 
on celestial bodies of mining interest have very diverse com-
positions. In some cases (e.g., the Moon and some asteroids) 
sulphide-containing minerals are scarce compared to ore-
grade sulphide minerals which are the focus of terrestrial 
biomining (Lewis 1992; Anand et al. 2012; Righter et al. 
2017; Steenstra et al. 2018, 2020; Brounce et al. 2019, 
2020). This poses restrictions on the possibility of directly 
transferring our current knowledge on bioleaching, which is 
mainly based on chemolithoautotrophic iron- and/or sulphur-
oxidising microorganisms, to space.
This review explores the topic of space biomining, dis-
cussing the main principles and feasibility, and analyses pos-
sible applications. We discuss limitations and highlight that, 
considering the materials available in space, it is necessary 
to expand our knowledge on organotrophic, cyanobacteria 
and community-based bioleaching mechanisms. Finally, we 
propose to consider the addition of biomining compartments 
to supply basic chemical requirements for Biological Life-
Support Systems (BLSS), and vice versa.
Space biomining principles
When talking about space biomining for ISRU, the follow-
ing three main questions have to be addressed: (1) What 
elements do we need to obtain for a given application? (2) 
Where can we find them? (3) Which mining strategy would 
work best (this could exclude biomining in some cases)? 
We will try to address these questions, to the best of our 
knowledge, in this section. Answering these questions can be 
complex, as it involves an interdisciplinary knowledge of the 
space conditions present on the planetary body we want to 
mine, the type of rocks and mineral compositions available 
(including their intrinsic leachability and toxicity), the engi-
neering technologies and biotechnologies required, in-space 
operational approach (a thorough discussion on the require-
ments for life support systems and ISRU for space explora-
tion, although focused on cyanobacteria-based structures, 
has been reported in Keller et al. 2021), and the appropriate 
microorganism(s) and its metabolism(s) (Averesch 2021). 
The situation becomes even more complicated when dis-
cussing asteroid biomining, given that the mined resources 
would likely not be used in situ, therefore requiring addi-
tional transport to the location of utilization (see Sect. 4.3).
To answer the first question, elements of high interest 
from the space biomining perspective vary depending on the 
aim (Cockell 2011; Raafat et al. 2013). Generally speaking, 
elements and molecules of interest for the establishment of 
a human settlements are water, molecular oxygen, essential 
mineral nutrients (e.g., potassium, sodium, calcium, phos-
phorus, sulphur), gaseous volatiles (e.g., hydrogen, carbon, 
nitrogen, helium), structural metals such as iron, copper, 
nickel and vanadium, and elements useful for electronic 
devices such as silicon and REEs (Menezes et al. 2015a, 
b). Some of these, especially volatiles, could be used to 
produce fuel or water (such as hydrogen, Klas et al. 2015). 
Of great economic interest are also elements as platinum 
group elements (PGE), gold, and silver, which are currently 
expensive. This list is not intended to be complete. It must 
be noted that many rocks in the Solar System would be 
regarded as low-grade ores, in respect to those considered 
suitable for mining on Earth (Cockell and Santomartino, in 
press). However, biomining on Earth is often used to pro-
cess mine waste, dumps and tailings which cannot be easily 
treated by conventional methods (Bosecker 1997; Mishra 
and Rhee 2014; Klas et al. 2015).
Growth, and in some cases bioleaching, of diverse micro-
organisms on extraterrestrial rocks or simulants have been 
demonstrated (Gronstal et al. 2009; Olsson-Francis and 
Cockell 2010; Kölbl et al. 2017; Metzger et al. 2020; Volger 

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 3 of 19 
7
et al. 2020; Milojevic et al. 2021), suggesting that, with the 
appropriate selection of species or consortia and conditions, 
microbial interaction with extraterrestrial substrate is pos-
sible. Moreover, space biomining experiments have been 
already performed in space. These include BioRock (Cockell 
et al. 2020, 2021; Santomartino et al. 2020) and BioAsteroid 
(2020/2021, data analysis in preparation), both performed 
onboard the International Space Station (ISS) and a prepara-
tive mission for BioRock (Byloos et al. 2017). Although not 
intended as fully scaled-up biomining experiments, they first 
demonstrated the feasibility of biomining in space using het-
erotrophic microorganisms (bacteria and fungi), and basalt 
or meteorite as substrates.
Space conditions and effects on biomining
Environments outside Earth show a variety of conditions 
which differ from those present on Earth’s surface. Their 
effects on microbial behaviour at different levels (e.g., 
growth, survival, resistance, virulence, biofilm formation) 
have been widely reported (reviewed in Horneck et al. 2010; 
Senatore et al. 2018), and still there is much yet to be under-
stood (Cockell 2021). Space can be considered an umbrella 
term which includes a variety of environments, each one 
with its own characteristics. For the aim of this review, we 
will report the following conditions present in three different 
space environments of relevance for the space biomining 
perspective: Mars, the Moon and asteroids (Table 1). On 
asteroids, given their small mass, we can generally assume 
conditions equivalent to that of spaceflight beyond Earth’s 
Van Allen belts, as described below.
All the conditions described here assume that the biomin-
ing operation has access to liquid water, an essential require-
ment for life (Cockell 2021). Water must either be obtained 
on the body of interest or imported. Although this is critical 
for biomining operations, here we focus on the other envi-
ronmental conditions within a biomining reactor that influ-
ence growth within a liquid environment.
	 i.	 Gravity Gravity is proportional to the mass of the 
celestial body under examination. As a consequence, 
gravities at the surface of Mars, the Moon and aster-
oids are lower than on Earth (9.8 m/s2, or 1×g). Mars 
has a gravity regimen of 3.7 m/s2 (~ 0.38×g), the Moon 
1.62 m/s2 (~ 0.16×g). Microgravity (µg or ~ ­10–6×g) 
is the gravity condition generally experienced in a 
spacecraft in a free trajectory (either in transit from 
one celestial body to another, or in orbit around one; 
Horneck et al. 2010; Zea et al. 2017; Huang et al. 
2018). Gravitational levels at the surface of an asteroid 
depend on the mass and the irregularity of its shape. 
While for more massive objects such as Ceres (0.27 m/
s2, or ~ 0.03×g), now considered a dwarf planet, grav-
Table 1   Conditions on Moon, Mars and asteroids that could influence space biomining, compared to those on Earth
When not stated in the table, see the main text for references. GCR​ galactic cosmic rays, SEP Solar energetic particles
Condition
Planetary body
Mars
Moon
Asteroids
Earth
Gravity
0.38×g
0.16×g
Micro to centigravity
1×g
Ionizing radiations
 ~ 20 µGy/hour (GCR, SEP)
 ~ 13.2 µGy/hour (GCR, SEP)
(GCR, SEP)
0.034–0.114 µGy/hour (Baum-
stark-Khan and Facius 2002)
Atmosphere composition
95% ­CO2, 2.8% ­N2, 2.1% Ar, 
trace gases
Negligible
Absent
78% ­N2, 20.9% ­O2, 0.9% Ar, 
0.04% ­CO2, trace gases
Pressure
6.1 mbar
3 × ­10–15 bar
Vacuum
1 bar (at sea level)
Temperature
− 153 °C to + 20 °C
− 178 °C to + 124 °C
Depends on the asteroid. 
Generally < − 20 °C
− 89.2 °C (Turner et al. 2009) 
to + 56.7 °C (El Fadli et al. 
2013)
Rock composition
Basalt containing plagiocase, 
pyroxene, olivine and sul-
phate minerals
Basalt, anorthosite and breccia. Minerals include plagioclase, 
pyroxene, olivine, ilmenite, spinel and others. KREEP rocks
Depending on the type. Can 
contain water, volatiles, rich 
elements (PGE), common 
metals, organic compounds
Primarily basalt and granite, 
a vast diversity of igneous 
sedimentary and metamorphic 
rocks

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 4 of 19
ity may be slightly higher (centigravity, in fact), the 
majority of asteroids are expected to have a gravity 
regimen similar to microgravity (Klas et al. 2015). 
It has been reported that cells with a diameter of less 
than 10 µm, which is the case for bacteria, archaea 
and many fungi, are too small to be directly affected 
by gravity or the lack thereof (Pollard 1965; Horneck 
et al. 2010; Zea et al. 2017). Instead, the responses 
observed are likely to be the indirect effects of altered 
extracellular environment where mass transport to and 
from the cell is limited to Brownian motion, limiting 
nutrient availability and resulting in the build-up of 
metabolic by-products with respect to 1×g (Bosecker 
1997; Zea 2015; Zea et al. 2016). However, microbial 
structures, namely biofilms, can be orders of magni-
tude larger. While biofilm growth is well known to 
occur on spacecraft components during spaceflight 
(McLean et al. 2001; Zea et al. 2020), controlled 
experiments have not shown consistent results, as 
increase, decrease, and no changes on biofilms grown 
in microgravity with respect to controls on Earth have 
been reported (reviewed in Zea et al. 2018). However, 
the effects of gravity on microbe-mineral interaction 
have not been characterized yet and should be fur-
ther investigated. BioRock, a recent space biomining 
experiment mentioned above, showed no difference 
in final cell concentrations for three biomining bacte-
rial species after 3 weeks of growth under terrestrial, 
Martian and micro-gravity (Santomartino et al. 2020). 
This result suggests that space microbial biotechnol-
ogies, including biomining, could be indifferent to 
gravitational conditions. Nevertheless, various hard-
ware settings and reactor volumes may lead to diver-
gent results, and other microbial species could react 
differently. Furthermore, processes that require gravity 
(e.g. sedimentation) will be impacted by changes in 
gravitational conditions.
	 ii.	 Radiation Earth’s magnetosphere and atmosphere 
protect us on the surface from most of the radiation 
environment experienced in space. Beyond the Van 
Allen belts (Prölss 2004), usually referred to as ‘deep 
space’, a radiation environment, mostly consisting of 
(i) galactic cosmic rays (GCR) and (ii) Solar ener-
getic particles (SEP), exists (Zeitlin et al. 2013; Zhang 
et al. 2020). In the case of the lunar surface, neutrons 
as secondary particles arising from the interaction of 
GCRs and SEP’s and the regolith may have an impact 
on biological systems that is yet unknown (Horneck 
et al. 2010; Klas et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2020). 
Hence, biomining operations beyond the Van Allen 
belts (i.e., on the Moon, Mars, and asteroids) need 
to consider the higher radiation environment. A wide 
literature studied microbial response and resistance 
to high dose of space radiations, including long-term 
exposure experiments outside the ISS (Horneck et al. 
2012). Many of these studies focused on resistance 
and survival after exposure in a dried or dormant state. 
Among the microorganisms that showed a higher 
resistance to space radiations we can find Chrooc-
cocidiopsis (Cockell et al. 2005; Billi et al. 2019), 
Bacillus subtilis (Moeller et al. 2014; Ulrich et al. 
2018; Nicholson and Ricco 2020) and Deinococcus 
radiodurans (Mattimore and Battista 1996; Minton 
1996), and some fungi as Aspergillus niger (Cortesão 
et al. 2020). Many of these have been also tested for 
their biomining (Brandl et al. 1999; Rozas et al. 2017; 
Faraji et al. 2018; Giese et al. 2019) or biosorption 
(Liu et al. 2012; Jaafar et al. 2015) capacity, suggest-
ing a possible role for biomining in space. It must 
be noted that some of the molecular mechanisms of 
radiation (and related stresses) tolerance require the 
entrance of the cell in a dormant state (e.g., endospore 
formation, desiccation). These may not be useful in a 
context of space biomining, in which metabolically 
active cells are required. Further research is, therefore, 
necessary to link these two fields of study, in order 
to understand the most suitable microorganisms or 
mechanisms for long-term biomining operations.
	 iii.	 Atmosphere composition and pressure Mars has a thin 
atmosphere, composed of approximately 95% of ­CO2, 
2.8% of ­N2, 2,1% Ar, trace gases including oxygen 
(0.13%) and hydrogen (Franz et al. 2017), and dust, 
with an average pressure at the surface of 6.1 mbar 
(Haberle 2015). Lunar atmosphere (composed of 
argon, helium, neon, sodium, potassium, hydrogen, 
trace elements and dust), with a pressure at the surface 
of 3 × ­10–15 bar and an average abundance at the sur-
face of 2 × ­105 particles/cm3, is considered negligible 
(Stern 1999; Lawson et al. 2005). Asteroids, includ-
ing Ceres, possess no atmosphere (Hughes 1994, 
Table 1). From a biomining perspective, the absence 
of oxygen constitutes a clear problem for those 
applications requiring aerobic microorganisms. The 
majority of bioleaching mechanisms elucidated so far 
occur in aerobic conditions. Nevertheless, anaerobic 
bioleaching has been demonstrated for some bacteria, 
although the mechanisms are not fully understood yet 
(Singh and Cameotra 2015). In anaerobic reductive 
dissolution, ­Fe3+ is used as electron acceptor. A. fer-
rooxidans, for instance, can catalyse the reduction of 
­Fe3+ under anaerobic and acidic conditions, coupled 
with oxidation of a c-type cytochrome (Ohmura et al. 
2002; Hallberg et al. 2011; Johnson et al. 2013; Singh 
and Cameotra 2015; Marrero et al. 2020). Shewanella 
onediensis, a facultative anaerobe, could extract iron 
from lunar and Martian simulants under aerobic and 

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 5 of 19 
7
anaerobic conditions (Castelein et al. 2021). Micro-
organisms with alternative types of metabolism, or 
bioengineering approaches, may also be used. More 
problematic may be the low pressure or, in the case of 
the Moon and asteroids, vacuum. Pressure is one of 
the parameters that can profoundly influence microbial 
proliferation, mostly due to desiccation and reduced 
gas concentration, and Martian atmospheric pressure 
is already too low to support most microbial growth 
(Schwendner and Schuerger 2020; Verseux 2020). 
The current lowest pressure recorded for microbial 
growth is 0.7 kPa (7 mbar; Schuerger and Nicholson 
2016). Nevertheless, low-pressure vacuum is used in 
biotechnologies, including biomining (Gnida 2020), 
and a bioreactor using low-pressure Mars-similar gas 
composition was successfully developed for cyano-
bacterial growth (Verseux et al. 2021). This suggests 
that, with the appropriate adaptation and engineering, 
challenges posed by extraterrestrial atmospheric com-
position and pressure could be overcome not to limit 
biomining applications. Low pressure could, indeed, 
reduce the engineering requirements of bioreactors.
	 iv.	 Temperature Temperature can influence not only 
microbial growth, but also the availability of liquid 
water for medium growth. Considering the prohibitive 
space temperatures and variations, discussed below, 
any space biotechnological application will need to 
use temperature-controlled bioreactors. However, tem-
peratures of biological-based processes are generally 
lower than those using chemical or physical processes 
(Johnson 2014), and bioengineering and synthetic 
biology approaches could improve biomining capac-
ity at low temperatures in order to decrease energy 
requirements. Martian surface temperature undergo 
considerable variations, leading to values varying 
from − 153 to + 20 °C (Murphy et al. 1990; Haberle 
2015). Due to the negligible atmosphere, surface 
temperature on the Moon varies between − 178 °C 
and + 124 °C (Williams et al. 2017). Asteroid surface 
temperatures depend on the distance from the Sun 
as well as from local differences in composition and 
topographic features, and they can vary largely among 
asteroids. On Ceres, surface temperatures oscillates 
between − 143 and − 73 °C, and similar conditions 
can be expected on smaller asteroids. For example, 
the highest surface temperature on asteroid 21 Lutetia, 
measured by Visible, InfraRed, and Thermal Imag-
ing Spectrometer (VIRTIS) on Rosetta, was − 28 °C 
(Coradini et al. 2011), and the surface temperature of 
Ryugu, measured by the Japanese Hayabusa2 orbiter, 
varies between − 50 °C and + 60 °C (Okada et al. 
2020). In other words, on all extraterrestrial bodies 
known, temperatures tend to generally exceed the 
known limits to life, implying that biomining opera-
tions will need to be conducted under strict tempera-
ture control.
	 v.	 Rock composition, regolith and minerals Regolith and 
rock composition need to be taken into account when 
deciding which biomining microorganism or tech-
nique to use in a given region of a planetary body, 
to extract the desired element(s), especially consid-
ering that they could also contain toxic compounds, 
for instance perchlorates (Hecht et al. 2009; Linnars-
son et al. 2012; Kounaves et al. 2014; Wadsworth and 
Cockell 2017). Fine regolith is particularly interesting 
from the mining perspective, as extracting elements 
from it would spare the energy required for rock crush-
ing (Carter 1992). The composition of Mars and Moon 
crusts have been highly studied and characterized. 
This allowed the preparation of several Martian and 
lunar analogue materials, which can be used to test 
if they could provide good substrates for microbial 
growth and elemental extraction (Olsson-Francis and 
Cockell 2010). A variety of meteorites are available 
to study asteroid composition, and microbial growth 
on meteorites has been demonstrated (Tait et al. 2017; 
Milojevic et al. 2019).
	
	   Our knowledge on Martian rock composition comes 
from landers, orbiting spacecrafts and Martian mete-
orite data. Martian bulk crust is mostly igneous and 
basaltic (McSween et al. 2009; Ehlmann and Edwards 
2014; Yoshizaki and McDonough 2020), with a high 
level of oxidized iron and magnesium (Clark 1993; 
Rieder et al. 1997; Yen et al. 2005; McSween et al. 
2009). Major minerals present in the Martian crust 
are silicates such as plagioclase, pyroxene and olivine 
(Ehlmann and Edwards 2014). FeO is also particularly 
abundant (Taylor 2013). Previous studies reported a 
high sulphur composition in Martian surface, mostly 
in the form of sulphate minerals (Greenwood et al. 
2000; Franz et al. 2019). Clay, carbonate and sulphate 
deposits have been found, and calcium, iron and mag-
nesium sulphate minerals have been identified from 
landers and orbital data (Ehlmann and Edwards 2014). 
However, recent estimations on sulphur abundance in 
Martian interiors suggest that sulphur and volatile 
content could be much less than previously indicated 
(Wang and Becker 2017; Franz et al. 2019; Yoshizaki 
and McDonough 2020), and sulphur has been found 
in small scale in certain zones of Martian surface 
(Ehlmann and dwards 2014). Zinc content is quite 
high while copper may be less present than on Earth, 
although copper-rich deposits could exist in specific 
Martian regions (Payré et al. 2019).
	
	   Lunar composition is largely silica-saturated 
basalts, anorthosite and breccia (Jolliff 2008); how-

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 6 of 19
ever, specific compositions differ around the crust, and 
between highlands and maria (Jolliff et al. 2000; Arai 
et al. 2008). Therefore, the relative abundance of min-
erals in lunar rocks or regolith depends on the location 
(Sivakumar et al. 2017). They include plagioclase, 
pyroxene, olivine, ilmenite, spinel and less abundant 
minerals (Meyer 2003; Ohtake et al. 2009; Anand et al. 
2012; Sivakumar et al. 2017), and they are anhydrous 
and reduced (Jolliff 2008). Interestingly, new mineral 
species have been identified on the Moon, for instance 
tranquillityite (Jolliff 2008). Sulphide-bearing apatite 
was also discovered in lunar rocks, although apatite is 
present only as accessory phases (Brounce et al. 2019, 
2020), as well as sulphides (Anand et al. 2012). There-
fore, sulphur appears to be less abundant on the Moon 
compared to Mars and some asteroids (Righter et al. 
2017; Steenstra et al. 2018). Lunar regolith follows 
a similar composition dominated by aluminosilicate 
basic rocks (anorthosites, nortic anorthosites, gabbroic 
anorthosite; Ohtake et al. 2009), with particle size 
between 10 nm and 100 µm. Mining fine lunar rego-
lith has been proposed as particularly interesting from 
the mining perspective, because it would not require 
rock crushing (Carter 1992). Moreover, lunar regolith 
presents solar wind implanted volatiles of great inter-
est for ISRU, such as hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon and 
helium (Anand et al. 2012). The presence of helium 
has attracted interest, as initial calculations estimated 
a possible cost-efficient transport to Earth as a source 
of clean energy (Wittenberg et al. 1986). However, 
more recent evaluations are less positive (Carter 1992; 
Anand et al. 2012). Particularly promising from a 
biomining perspective is also a region named Procel-
larum KREEP terrane (PKT), characterized by high 
percentage of potassium, REEs, phosphorus and tho-
rium (Taylor et al. 2006).
	
	   Owing to the large number of different types of 
asteroids, specific cases should be considered when 
discussing asteroid biomining. Meteorites are made 
of material from diverse planetary bodies, including 
asteroids (Housen et al. 1979), but asteroid composi-
tion varies widely depending on the type. A complete 
description of asteroidal composition is beyond the 
scope of this review; however, information comes 
largely from the analysis of available meteorites, 
which are mainly chondrites (Lewis 1992; Yoshizaki 
and McDonough 2021). Meteorites can be divided 
into stony, stony-iron and iron. Stony chondritic mete-
orites are a class of undifferentiated meteorites that 
are highly interesting from the biomining perspective 
and compose the large part of those that fall on Earth. 
Composition varies largely between types. Carbona-
ceous chondrites (C chondrites) are particularly rich 
in organic compounds, nitrogen and sulphur; enstatite 
chondrites (E chondrites) are highly reduced and con-
tain silicon, iron, nickel and sulphides; the most abun-
dant group falls in the intermediate categories of H, L 
and LL chondrites, with free metal elements, decreas-
ing iron content and a lower presence of sulphur in 
respect to the former two (Lewis 1992). Water, vola-
tiles, organic compounds, elements as the platinum 
group elements (PGE: platinum, osmium, ruthenium, 
rhodium, palladium and iridium) and more common 
metals such as iron or nickel can be present, in quanti-
ties depending on the asteroid type (Klas et al. 2015; 
Steenstra et al. 2018, 2020). Sulphur depletion on 
some asteroids and meteorite surfaces has been docu-
mented, as a consequence of space weathering of iron 
sulphides (Matsumoto et al. 2020). To mention a few 
notable asteroid examples, 21 Lutetia has a metal-rich 
composition with mafic silicate minerals poor in iron 
and hydrated minerals (Coradini et al. 2011), Ceres is 
rich in hydrated minerals, ammoniated phyllosilicates 
and carbonates, salts and organic material (De Sanc-
tis et al. 2017). Similarly, 24 Themis (Campins et al. 
2010) and Bennu (Lauretta et al. 2019) have water and 
organic compounds on their surface. Samples from 
Itokawa (S-type asteroid), obtained in the Hayabusa 
mission, revealed not only a composition similar to 
LL-chondrites, but also provided insights into regolith 
composition and properties (Tsuchiyama et al. 2011).
We will shortly have data from the JAXA Hayabusa2 
and the NASA OSIRIS-Rex missions on the returning 
samples from Ryugu and Bennu, respectively.
	
	   Crucial within the context of all these materials is 
that, when they are added to a liquid water environ-
ment for biomining, they do not result in water activity 
levels or toxicity that makes them uninhabitable for 
biomining organisms. Unless the parent material con-
tains high concentrations of salts (e.g., NaCl) there is 
no a priori reason why any of the materials discussed 
above should result in unsuitable water activities. The 
potential toxicity caused by ions (e.g., heavy metals) 
will depend on the material and the organisms used, 
but clearly this must be considered for any given com-
bination of minerals and biomining organisms pro-
posed (Averesch 2021).
Terrestrial biomining mechanisms and space 
applicability
Bioleaching can be performed by chemolithotrophic and 
organotrophic microorganisms (Asghari et al. 2013; Srichan-
dan et al. 2019). In most cases, consortia of microorganisms 
and biofilm formation have an important role in improv-
ing and enhancing biomining, compared to single-species 

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 7 of 19 
7
approaches. Moreover, biotechnological and synthetic biol-
ogy techniques can be applied to ameliorate microbial resist-
ance to toxic compounds and enhance metal extraction. All 
these concepts can be applied to space biomining.
Chemolithotroph microorganisms
This first group includes the most commonly used and 
characterized biomining organisms, autotrophic iron-oxi-
dising and/or sulphur-oxidising microorganisms which 
thrive at low pH. Low pH allows many metal ions, such as 
iron, to remain in solution, although neutral-pH biomin-
ing is possible (Blowes et al. 2003). These microorgan-
isms include mesophilic bacteria (optimum 28–37 °C), 
moderate thermophilic bacteria (40–60 °C) and thermo-
phile chemolithotrophs (60–80 °C), which commonly 
belong to archaea (Bosecker 1997; Asghari et al. 2013; 
Srichandan et al. 2019). The genera Acidithiobacillus, 
Thiobacillus and Leptospirillium contain a large propor-
tion of these microorganisms, and they have been often 
isolated from mine-drainage sites (Blowes et al. 2003). 
Some archaea include the genera Acidianus, Ferroplasma, 
Metallosphaera and Sulfolobus (Schippers et al. 2013). 
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, an iron and sulphur oxi-
dizing microorganism, and Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans, 
a strictly sulphur oxidizing bacterium, are two of the most 
commonly used bacteria in bioleaching (Levicán et al. 
2008).
On Earth, metals of interest are often embedded into sul-
phidic minerals (e.g., iron in pyrite ­FeS2, copper in chal-
copyrite ­CuFeS2, and molybdenum in molybdenite ­MoS2). 
The processes of metal dissolution performed by chemo-
lithotrophs includes the biological oxidation of ­Fe2+ to ­Fe3+, 
which in turn oxidises the sulphide mineral to sulphate and 
sulphuric acid. This latter maintains the low pH required 
to improve metal solubilisation (Olson et al. 2003; Asghari 
et al. 2013; Schippers et al. 2013; Singh and Cameotra 2015; 
Marrero et al. 2020). Metal sulphide dissolution can occur 
by two main pathways, depending on the mineral species 
(i.e., electronic configuration and consequent reactivity 
to proton attack) and named after the intermediate that is 
formed: (a) thiosulphate ­(S2O3
2−) pathway, enabling the sol-
ubilization of acid-insoluble metal sulphides minerals, and 
(b) polysulphide ­(H2Sn) pathway, which can solubilize acid-
soluble minerals (Schippers and Sand 1999; Rohwerder et al. 
2003; Marrero et al 2020). The latter can be solubilized by 
sulphur-oxidizing bacteria, since the process does not neces-
sarily require ­Fe3+. These microorganisms are also required 
to dissolve the elemental sulphur which is formed during the 
process (Rohwerder et al. 2003). Metal sulphide dissolution 
can occur by contact and non-contact mechanisms, although 
it has been recently suggested that the two mechanisms are 
similar (Sand et al. 2001; Rohwerder et al. 2003; Srichandan 
et al. 2019). Details on these, and on the importance of bio-
films for bioleaching, are discussed in Sect. 3.2.4. More 
recently, reductive dissolution of ferric ion in oxidized ores 
(e.g. laterites) from A. ferrooxidans has been demonstrated. 
In this process, anaerobic conditions can be used as ­Fe3+ is 
the terminal electron acceptor (Hallberg et al. 2011; Johnson 
et al. 2013; Singh and Cameotra 2015). Elemental sulphur 
is, however, required as an energy source (Hallberg et al. 
2011; Johnson et al. 2013; Singh and Cameotra 2015), and 
the mechanisms still need to be fully elucidated (Singh and 
Cameotra 2015; Marrero et al. 2020).
The use of chemolithotroph microorganisms in space 
biomining has two main advantages: first, the mecha-
nisms have been widely characterized and second, they 
do not require the presence of organic compounds to grow 
(Averesch 2021). Growth, interaction and metal extraction 
from space rocks/regolith or analogues using chemolitho-
troph microorganisms have been demonstrated (González-
Toril et al. 2005; Gronstal et al. 2009; Kölbl et al. 2017; Tait 
et al. 2017; Milojevic et al. 2021). However, as discussed in 
Sect. 3.1, mineral composition of space rocks of biomining 
interest can differ widely not only among planetary bod-
ies, but also within the same planet or asteroid. This type 
of bioleaching microorganisms could not be applied, or be 
less efficient, to space rocks with low sulphur content, for 
instance the Moon, some asteroids and potentially some 
Martian regions (Fig. 1, see also Sect. 3.1).
Organotroph microorganisms
The second group of bioleaching microorganisms includes 
organotrophic bacteria and fungi. These are heterotrophic 
organisms which require organic compounds as a source of 
carbon for their metabolism, and they can solubilize oxidic, 
silicious and carbonaceous materials (Asghari et al. 2013). 
The metal solubilization of the ore occurs by the action of 
(i) organic acids or (ii) hydrogen cyanide produced by the 
bacterial or fungal cell. In this case, bioleaching can occur 
at circumneutral or slightly alkaline pH (Bosecker 1997). (i) 
Regarding the first mechanism, fungi have been particularly 
characterized for their organic acid-mediated bioleaching 
capacity, which can occur by (a) acidolysis, (b) complexoly-
sis, (c) redoxolysis and (d) bioaccumulation (Asghari et al. 
2013; Srichandan et al. 2019). (a) In acidolysis, protons from 
the organic acid react with the mineral surface, weakening 
the bonds and consequently releasing the metal of interest. 
Concurrently, (b) complexolysis can also happen, in which 
complexation between the metal and the organic acid, or 
more rarely amminoacids (Maneesuwannarat et al. 2019), 
occurs. (c) During redoxolysis, metal solubilization is pro-
moted by its enzymatic oxidation or reduction, while in (d) 
bioaccumulation the soluble metal ions can be transported 
through the cell membrane and accumulate as solid particle 

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 8 of 19
within the cell or in vacuoles (Asghari et al. 2013; Srichan-
dan et al. 2019). The organic acids identified to be asso-
ciated with bioleaching include citric acid, gluconic acid, 
oxalic acid, citramalic acid, acetic acid, succinic acid and 
itaconic acid (Gadd 1999; Adeleke et al. 2010; Amin et al. 
2014; Brisson et al. 2016, 2020). Fungal bioleaching spe-
cies include, but is not limited to, Penicillium spp. (Franz 
et al. 1991; Bosecker 1997; Ambreen et al. 2002; Adeleke 
et al. 2010), Aspergillus spp, (Brisson et al. 2016; Din et al. 
2020) and Paecilomyces spp. (Brisson et al. 2016, 2020). 
Bacterial species include Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas and 
Bacillus spp. (Reed et al. 2016; Rozas et al. 2017; Barnett 
et al. 2018; Giese et al. 2019). Brisson and colleagues (Bris-
son et al. 2020) recently performed a thorough metabolomic 
study which suggested that bioleaching of a given element 
could be mediated by specific organic acids, rather than 
organic acids in general. (ii) The second group of organo-
trophic bioleaching microorganisms include species pro-
ducing hydrogen cyanide (HCN, also called cyanogenic 
microorganisms), that use glycine for its production. HCN 
formation is usually an aerobic process (Srichandan et al. 
2019). These organisms can perform bioleaching at mild 
temperatures (25–35 °C) and a circum-neutral to basic pH 
(7–11; Valix 2017). Cyanide forms complexes with the 
metals, whose solubility in water and chemical stability 
are highly increased. Many metal and metalloids, including 
precious elements such as gold, platinum and silver, have 
been successfully extracted from electronic waste using 
cyanogenic microorganisms, which include Pseudomonas 
spp., Bacillus megaterium, Escherichia coli and Chromo-
bacterium violaceum (Valix 2017). Notably, cyanobacteria 
have been shown to perform bioleaching as well (Cecal et al. 
2000; Singh 2020). Despite being autotrophic organisms, 
their bioleaching mechanisms are similar to those of organo-
trophic microorganisms and involve biosorption through pol-
ysaccharides and organic acids (containing amino, carboxyl, 
hydroxyl and carbonyl groups) present on the cell surface 
and in biofilms (Huang et al. 2020; Singh 2020).
Fig. 1   Diagram summarizing the main types of biomining/bioleach-
ing microorganisms and mechanisms, and their potential space 
applicability taking into account the general surface composition 
and mineral content of Mars, Moon and asteroids. The central ‘bio-
engineering’ panel highlights the potential use of bioengineering 
and synthetic biology approaches to enhance and overcome possible 
limitations of wild type microorganisms. Sphere colour indicates the 
tentative applicability to planetary bodies, based on the general crust 
composition. Other parameters (atmosphere, pressure, gravity, tem-
perature, etc.) have not been considered here

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 9 of 19 
7
Extraction of REEs and vanadium from basalt (Mars and 
Moon analogue rock) using organotrophic bacteria (Sphin-
gomonas desiccabilis and Bacillus subtilis) was successfully 
performed on the ISS under Martian gravity and micrograv-
ity (Cockell et al. 2020, 2021), while copper, iron and mag-
nesium were extracted by Cupriavidus metallidurans from 
basalt after three months of spaceflight (Byloos et al. 2017). 
Although used also for extraction from sulphide minerals 
(Johnson and Roberto 1997), these microorganisms are par-
ticularly useful for recovery of metals from non-sulphidic 
minerals and industrial waste that do not contain the sulphur 
necessary to sustain chemolithotroph growth (Asghari et al. 
2013; Hosseini Nasab et al. 2020). Hence, organotrophic 
microorganisms with demonstrated biomining capacity 
could be applied to space biomining to extract elements 
from those rocks and regolith with low sulphur content, for 
instance lunar rocks (see also Sect. 3.1). A tentative diagram 
showing potential applications of biomining mechanisms to 
space, based on general surface composition of planetary 
bodies, is shown in Fig. 1. The diagram is not intended as 
exhaustive or definitive, as other parameters have not been 
considered, but it shows that careful selection of biomining 
mechanisms and microorganisms is needed when planning 
for space applications, as indeed for any space bioengineer-
ing and biomanufacturing process (Averesch 2021).
Biomining consortia
Consortia of microorganisms, rather than single species, are 
often used in biomining, as they can perform different reac-
tions which eventually lead to the metal extraction (Rawl-
ings and Johnson 2007). In many cases the consortium has 
increased bioleaching efficacy. Qiu et al. (2015) showed 
how bioleaching of copper from chalcopyrite was enhanced 
in a co-culture of A. ferrooxidans and A. thiooxidans com-
pared to single cultures (Qiu et al. 2005). The roles that 
microorganisms can perform in a consortium include the 
oxidation of the ferrous fraction, the generation of a low 
pH by oxidation of the sulphur moiety and consequent 
acidification of the solutions, and the degradation of the 
organic compounds formed in the process (Johnson 2018). 
Although some bioleaching microorganisms can perform 
multiple roles (e.g., A. ferrooxidans), others can perform 
a single role in the process, such as A. thiooxidans, being 
a strict sulphur-oxidizing bacterium (Blowes et al. 2003; 
Levicán et al. 2008). Heterotrophic consortia and mixes of 
heterotrophic–autotrophic consortia have also been studied 
(Bryan et al. 2015; Valix 2017). Selection of the appropri-
ate consortium for a given biomining application can occur 
by a “top-down” approach, in which a mix of microorgan-
isms is naturally selected by growing in the presence of a 
certain mineral, or by a “bottom-up” approach, in which 
a consortium is designed by selecting required parameters 
(Rawlings and Johnson 2007). Bioengineering of consortia 
has been also attempted (Rawlings and Johnson 2007; Brune 
and Bayer 2012; Gumulya et al. 2018). All these approaches 
are promising from a space biomining perspective, although 
they may be limited by the necessity to optimize consortia 
using rock and regolith simulant, when real space samples 
are not available.
The possibility to use heterotrophic organisms for non-
sulphidic mineral dissolution in space biomining has been 
discussed. While using these microorganisms may present 
many other advantages (Averesch 2021), one disadvantage 
is certainly their requirement for a carbon source. This could 
be overcome by using a consortium containing heterotrophic 
biomining microorganisms and cyanobacteria: the latter 
could produce the organic compounds, and the oxygen, nec-
essary to sustain growth and organic acid production (Ver-
seux et al. 2016; Billi et al. 2021) necessary for biomining 
in space, without the need to provide these nutrients from 
external sources. The oxygen production would be useful, 
as it could sustain aerobic biomining in general. Moreover, 
cyanobacteria (particularly Anabaena cylindrica) have been 
demonstrated to successfully leach mineral elements from 
basalt and anorthosite (Olsson-Francis and Cockell 2010). 
An attempt to test the efficacy of bioleaching of asteroidal 
material performed by a small artificial heterotrophic con-
sortium (the bacterium S. desiccabilis plus the fungus P. 
simplicissimum) in microgravity has been completed on the 
ISS (BioAsteroid, data in preparation).
The role of biofilm formation
Microbially mediated leaching of sulphidic minerals can 
occur by contact and non-contact interaction, although it has 
been recently suggested that the two mechanisms overlap. In 
the case of direct interaction, the microbial cell is in contact 
with the mineral surface through the extracellular polymeric 
substances (EPS), and the sulphur fraction is oxidised to 
sulphate by the ­Fe3+-glucuronic acids complex in the EPS. 
In the non-contact mechanism, instead, the microbial plank-
tonic cell acts by oxidizing the ­Fe2+ and reduced sulphur 
species that are dissolved in the solution (Sand et al. 2001; 
Blowes et al. 2003). Biofilm formation is important for both 
interactions, as it not only enhances the contact of microbial 
cells with the rock surface, but also increases the concentra-
tion of ions and compounds that allow bioleaching, the com-
munication between cells of same or different species, and 
the resistance to toxic metals and compounds (Noël et al. 
2010; Bellenberg et al. 2014; Yu et al. 2014; Gumulya et al. 
2018). Indeed, biofilm enhances organotrophic bioleaching 
as well, through the action of the compounds embedded in 
the matrix (EPS), including polysaccharides and organic 
acids (Rohwerder et al. 2003; Yu et al. 2014; Gumulya et al. 
2018; Huang et al. 2020). When biofilms may limit the 

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 10 of 19
access to the substrate, microorganisms have been demon-
strated to modify EPS accordingly (Rohwerder et al. 2003).
Many studies on biofilm formation in space demonstrated 
the production of thicker or structural different biofilms 
during spaceflights (McLean et al. 2001; Zea et al. 2018, 
2020). A study conducted on board the ISS interrogated 
biofilm formation and found that, under certain conditions, 
a novel “column and canopy” structure was observed in 
microgravity (Kim et al. 2013). The BioRock experiment 
studied microbe–mineral interaction and bioleaching from 
basalt rock of three heterotrophic bacterial species, showing 
a positive biofilm formation for S. desiccabilis and C. metal-
lidurans within the rock surface under all the gravity condi-
tion tested (microgravity, Martian and terrestrial gravities), 
particularly around edges and cavities (Santomartino et al. 
in preparation). S. desiccabilis and B. subtilis were able to 
extract useful elements under different gravity regimens dur-
ing the same experiment, suggesting an uninfluential role of 
gravity on microbial bioleaching mechanisms (Cockell et al. 
2020, 2021). The data on biofilm formation and growth will, 
therefore, provide useful insights into the effects of biofilm 
formation in space biomining.
Bioengineering
In the presence of mine ore or waste, microbial growth 
can be hindered by toxic compounds, heavy metals and 
stressor factors. Therefore, it comes as no surprise that 
many extremotolerant and extremophilic microorganisms 
have been isolated as bioleaching agents. This characteris-
tic of bioleaching organisms is, by itself, of great use when 
considering space biomining, since extraterrestrial rego-
lith can often bear toxic compounds, such as perchlorates 
(Hecht et al. 2009; Wadsworth and Cockell 2017). When 
not endogenous, resistance could be developed by adaptive 
evolution, random mutagenesis or bioengineering and syn-
thetic biology approaches (Gumulya et al. 2018). Engineer-
ing of single species or a microbial consortium to enhance 
desired characteristics, or reduce the impact of the undesired 
ones, is possible, although the success rate of the engineer-
ing approach depend on the recalcitration of some micro-
organisms to genetic manipulation (Rawlings and Johnson 
2007; Brune and Bayer 2012; Johnson et al. 2013). Synthetic 
biology approaches can be used to improve the tolerance, 
and therefore the output, of biomining microorganisms. The 
concept is not trivial, as bioengineering has been optimized 
for a few microbial species (e.g., E. coli strains), mainly het-
erotrophic (Averesch 2021), while tools are rarely available 
for environmental and undomesticated samples. Gumulya 
et al. (2018) provides a list of tools developed specifically 
for a few biomining microorganisms, including A. ferroox-
idans and A. thiooxidans. In many cases, synthetic biology 
has been used to improve the resistance of E. coli strains 
to acid, thermal or heavy metal stress, to mention a few. 
This is achieved by heterologous expression of proteins of 
interest, often isolated from bioleaching microorganisms 
(Gumulya et al. 2018). Nevertheless, attempts to engineer 
specific biomining microorganisms (Gumulya et al. 2018) 
and biofilms for biomining applications (Buetti-Dinh et al. 
2020) have been performed as well. Deinococcus radio-
durans, also known for its astrobiological relevant proper-
ties such as resistance to polyextremes and space conditions, 
has been engineered to enhance its bioremediation capacity 
(Daly 2000). Attempts to genetically enhance acidophilic 
biomining microorganisms have been reported (reviewed in 
Gumulya et al. 2018), for instance by expressing arsenic 
resistance and rusticyanin proteins in A. ferrooxidans (Liu 
et al. 2011, 2013).
Although synthetic biology applications to biomining 
are still young, approaches to ameliorate resistance to space 
conditions, to enhance extraction of elements under these, 
or overcome issues, could be an excellent opportunity for 
space biomining, and a wide variety of possible applications 
have been reported (Cockell 2011; Montague et al. 2012; 
Menezes et al. 2015b; Rothschild 2016; Verseux et al. 2016). 
Notably, the importance of synthetic biology approaches 
for ISRU has been proposed (Cockell 2011; Menezes et al. 
2015b; Rothschild 2016; Nangle et al. 2020; Averesch 2021).
Space biomining applications
Biomining in the context of ISRU and self‑sustaining 
extraterrestrial settlements
One of the most relevant applications for space biomining is 
in ISRU. In particular, Bio-ISRU refers to the use of biotech-
nologies to achieve the exploitation of resources from plan-
etary bodies (Brown et al. 2008). However, myriad resources 
will need to be acquired and processed in situ to enable self-
sustaining settlements in space, and many commodities will 
likely require a combination of physico-chemical and bio-
logical approaches (Keller et al. 2021). Transportation to 
and from the settlement and Earth, and between settlements, 
will require fuel for the transport vehicles. While methane 
production for Martian architecture (Ash et al. 1978; Musk 
2017) may be partly done via biological methods (Klas et al. 
2015), oxygen and hydrogen extraction from lunar rego-
lith for chemically based propulsion (Jamanca-Lino 2021) 
will likely be performed via physico-chemical processes 
(Schwandt et al. 2012). Other essential resources arise from 
human needs: water, oxygen, atmospheric pressure, food 
and waste management. Water can be found in permanently 
shadowed craters on the Moon and in different locations on 
Mars and asteroids; this water can also serve to meet oxygen 
needs. Oxygen and an inert gas like ­N2 will be needed to 

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 11 of 19 
7
reach required atmospheric pressures (Niederwieser et al. 
2019).
In this context, biomining could be one of the methods to 
provide the structural metals (e.g., iron, nickel, vanadium, 
copper) for construction of buildings and machinery, or to 
build electronic devices and magnets (e.g., REEs, silicon; 
Cockell 2010, 2011; Montague et al. 2012; Menezes et al. 
2015b; Rothschild 2016; Verseux et al. 2016). Bioleaching 
microorganisms could also be applied to recycle useful ele-
ments from electric waste (Brandl et al. 1999; Rozas et al. 
2017; Srichandan et al. 2019).
Apart from structural materials, bioleaching of rego-
lith and rocks could provide water, useful volatiles (e.g., 
oxygen from the dissolution of oxide minerals, hydrogen, 
carbon, sulphur) and mineral nutrients (e.g., potassium, 
sodium, calcium, phosphorus, sulphur) essential for life 
(Cockell 2010, 2011; Montague et al. 2012; Menezes et al. 
2015b; Rothschild 2016; Verseux et al. 2016; Huang et al. 
2020). Biomining is not intrinsically a traditional part of 
BLSS (Eckart 1992). However, the principal and second-
ary (e.g., waste) products from bioleaching discussed 
so far could be used to sustain biological compartments 
in life-support systems, including human crew (see for 
instance the ESA’s MELiSSA life support project; Gòdia 
Fig. 2   Conceptual figure of a biomining/bioleaching compartment in 
the context of BLSS, based on the regenerative life-support systems 
MELiSSA project design (Gòdia et  al. 2002; Lasseur and Mergeay 
2021). Potential useful elements produced by this compartment are 
shown in orange

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 12 of 19
et al. 2002; Lasseur and Mergeay 2021). In turn, bioleach-
ing microorganisms (particularly aerobic and heterotrophic 
ones) could benefit from waste materials produced from 
the regenerative support system (Billi et al. 2021; Keller 
et al. 2021). Considering all this, the addition of a biomin-
ing/bioleaching compartment could be a beneficial addi-
tion to supply basic chemical requirements for a BLSS, 
and vice versa (Fig. 2).
Bioremediation
Similar chemical reactions to those involved in biomining 
are used to perform bioremediation on Earth, to elimi-
nate toxic and polluting compounds from soil and waters 
(Gadd 2010). Extremophiles and extremotolerant micro-
organisms (Jeong and Choi 2020), fungi (e.g., Aspergil-
lus and Penicillium spp.; Yamada-Onodera et al. 2002; 
Din et al. 2020) and other bacterial species (for instance 
Sphingomonas; Chen 2012) are often used. The capacity 
to remove heavy metals, radioactive species (uranium), 
acids (including acid mine drainage produced through 
mining and biomining processes), organic pollutants 
and salts has been demonstrated (Gadd 2010; Brune and 
Bayer 2012). It is worth mentioning that many of these 
species can indeed thrive in (extremophiles and polyextre-
mophiles) or tolerate (extremotolerant and polyextremo-
tolerant) a variety of extreme conditions, which might 
come in handy in space. To mention a few examples, 
many chemolithotrophic microorganisms used in biomin-
ing, such as Acidithiobacillus and Ferroplasma, are aci-
dophiles, while Sulfolobus and Metallosphaera are both 
acidophiles and thermophiles (Rohwerder et al. 2003; 
Coker 2016). Regarding organotrophic microorganisms, 
A. niger spores demonstrated resistance to high doses of 
radiations (Cortesão et al. 2020), while S. desiccabilis 
biofilms could withstand desiccation and Martian brines 
(Stevens et al. 2019), for instance.
The lunar and Martian surfaces contain a number of 
toxic compounds that could hinder not only biomining, 
but also the settlement itself. Examples include perchlo-
rates on Mars (Hecht et al. 2009; Kounaves et al. 2014) 
and toxic lunar dusts (Linnarsson et al. 2012). Micro-
organisms performing biomining could also be selected 
for bioremediation approaches to ameliorate these com-
ponents by making them less toxic or removing them. A 
recent study identified the genes involved in perchlorate 
resistance from microorganisms isolated from the Ata-
cama desert (Díaz-Rullo et al. 2021). A Chroococcidi-
opsis species and its derivate (CCMEE 029 and CCMEE 
029 P-MRS, respectively) had no negative effect to per-
chlorate exposure, and the biomass produced could be 
used to feed an heterotrophic bacterial species (E. coli; 
Billi et al. 2021). A new record for perchlorate tolerance 
was reported for the fungus Planococcus halocryophi-
lus (Heinz et al. 2020). Shewanella onediensis was found 
slightly impacted by perchlorates (Volger et al. 2020), 
and it was able to reduce chromium, although growth was 
inhibited at high concentrations of this metal (Middleton 
et al. 2003). Moreover, biofilms could be used to set-
tle dangerous dusts and enrich regolith with nutritious 
elements, which will allow the fertilization of soils (Liu 
et al. 2008; Cockell 2011; Mergelov et al. 2018; Eichler 
et al. 2021).
Asteroid biomining
The concept of asteroid mining is slightly different and 
deserves a separate discussion. While biomining on Mars 
and the Moon will likely have the aim to directly sustain 
extraterrestrial settlements located on these planetary bod-
ies, there is no current interest in creating a stable human 
presence on asteroids (although in the long term this could 
change). This poses the problem of transporting the extracted 
materials to their final destination, hence the viability of the 
process depends on the costs, which depend on the richness 
of elements and their location (Gertsch 1992), and of course 
on the engineering constraints. Asteroids of interest from 
the biomining perspective belong to either the near-Earth 
objects or the asteroid belt, beyond Mars orbit. For lunar set-
tlements or return to Earth, near-Earth objects could be more 
appropriate, while for Martian settlements objects from 
asteroid belt could be used (Gaffey 1992; Gertsch 1992).
Molecules of interest from the asteroid biomining per-
spective are water, volatiles and carbon compounds, expen-
sive (PGE, gold, silver) and common metals (Klas et al. 
2015). We discussed in Sect. 3.1.v the wide variety of 
asteroids and their composition, as well as the fact that our 
knowledge on these is limited by data coming from the avail-
able meteorites and the few returning samples from space 
missions (Metzger and Britt 2020). It has been estimated 
that the total number of minor asteroids in the asteroid belt 
is highly underestimated (Krasinsky et al. 2002). These con-
siderations imply that a wider knowledge on asteroid type 
and composition is necessary to select objects of interest for 
space biomining.
Asteroid biomining is gaining increasing interest, and a 
variety of companies are forming to develop engineering 
strategies (Lewicki et al. 2013), and scientists are assessing 
microbial growth and colonization of meteorites (Klas et al. 
2015; Tait et al. 2017; Milojevic et al. 2019), including the 
abovementioned BioAsteroid experiment, showing bacterial 
and fungal mediated leaching of an L-chondrite on the ISS 
(data under analysis).

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 13 of 19 
7
Benefits for Earth
Scientific research topics are naturally interconnected. 
Owing to the harshness of the space environment, space 
exploration requires the most advanced human ingenuity 
and scientific technologies. Once these are developed, they 
would be available for terrestrial applications and benefit 
the quality of life on Earth (ISECG 2013). Space micro-
biology also has a significant impact in our everyday life 
(Horneck et al. 2010). With this view in mind, it is expected 
that advances in space biomining will eventually benefit ter-
restrial biomining technologies (Metzger 2016). It has been 
proposed that biomining of specific planetary bodies, for 
instance some asteroids and even the Moon (Carter 1992), 
could provide useful elements for terrestrial use. However, 
at present this has not been found to be a viable opportunity. 
Nevertheless, many realistic benefits can be listed.
As mentioned before, the BioRock experiment demon-
strated the ability of S. desiccabilis to extract REEs and 
vanadium under a variety of gravity conditions on the ISS 
(Cockell et al. 2020, 2021). This was the first demonstra-
tion of the ability of S. desiccabilis to perform biomining, 
providing a novel microorganism for terrestrial applica-
tions. Improvement of biomining technologies, including 
amelioration of strains for the extraction of elements from 
low-grade ores and under extreme conditions could provide 
tools for similar aims on Earth. Designing of highly efficient 
biomining reactors and hardware would be another appli-
cable benefit. The same concept could be easily applied to 
bioremediation, hence to environmental issues as follows: 
microorganisms with demonstrated tolerance and capacity 
to bioaccumulate and remediate toxic compounds under the 
harsh Martian and lunar conditions could be used for ter-
restrial purposes, or inform us on how to achieve similar 
goals here.
Augmentation of sustainable approaches by learning from 
space biotechnologies will be a great benefit for Earth. The 
major space agencies aligned with the United Nations Sus-
tainable Development Goals (https://​sdgs.​un.​org/​goals), and 
these principles can be applied to human space exploration. 
Biomining is widely recognized to be more environmental 
friendly in respect to traditional mining approaches (Jerez 
2017a); hence learning how to improve bioleaching from 
advancements in the challenging field of space biomining 
would also have a positive environmental impact on Earth. 
Moreover, improving the design of self-sustaining extra-
terrestrial settlements, for instance by including a biomin-
ing compartment, electronic waste recycling and synthetic 
biology approaches to engineer biomining microorganisms 
to use different waste as nutrients (e.g., plastics), would 
inform on terrestrial strategies to improve circular economy 
approaches.
Conclusions
As the goal for space exploration expands toward estab-
lishing permanent settlements in space, space biomining 
is generating an increasing interest. The main space agen-
cies have recognized its potential in their roadmaps. Many 
are the advantages, as terrestrial biomining is considered 
a sustainable approach in both the economic and envi-
ronmental terms (Jerez 2017a). Moreover, many rocks in 
the Solar System would be considered low-grade ores for 
terrestrial standards (Cockell and Santomartino, in press), 
and biomining on Earth is commonly used to process mine 
waste, dumps and tailings (Bosecker 1997; Mishra and 
Rhee 2014). The use of bioleaching microorganisms could 
also be applied to bioremediation, recycling of waste and 
to support BLSS.
Although promising, the science around space biomin-
ing is still relatively young. Considering the differences 
between terrestrial and extraterrestrial conditions, includ-
ing rock type and ore availability, a direct application of 
established terrestrial biomining techniques may not be 
always possible. Energetic and metabolic demands need to 
be taken into account. Engineering requirements for space 
biomining reactors will require temperature controls, aer-
ation and stirring under complex and harsh conditions. 
While most terrestrial biomining knowledge is based on 
autotrophic microorganisms able to break down sulphidic 
minerals without the need of carbon compounds, many 
rocks in the Solar Systems may present a low sulphur con-
tent. In these cases, heterotrophic microorganisms could 
be a better choice, but they would require organic com-
pounds. Moreover, most bioleaching reactions are aerobic, 
and oxygen itself will be a commodity in space. A careful 
selection of the most appropriate techniques and micro-
organisms will be required for any given application, and 
the optimal solution could include complementary systems 
(Averesch 2021). Ethic and planetary protection discus-
sions are outside of the aim of this review. Nevertheless, it 
is necessary to take them into account when planning the 
preferred method for mining or ISRU in a specific region 
or planetary body, as they could pose a further limitation.
Biomining is one of the possible approaches to achieve 
ISRU, and its selection over other methods should at least 
consider all the parameters discussed here. Neverthe-
less, its advantages make it pivotal to invest in terrestrial 
and space-based research of specific methods for space 
applications. This includes learning more on the effects 
of space conditions on biomining and bioremediation, 
expanding our knowledge on organotrophic, cyanobac-
teria and community-based bioleaching mechanisms, on 
anaerobic biomining, and investigating the use of synthetic 
biology to overcome limitations.

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 14 of 19
Acknowledgements  Rosa Santomartino and Charles S. Cockell were 
supported by United Kingdom Science and Technology Facilities 
Council under grants ST/R000875/1 and ST/V000586/1. Luis Zea was 
supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under 
Grant No. 80NSSC18K1486, by BioServe Space Technologies, and by 
the University of Colorado Boulder’s Research Innovation Office (RIO) 
Seed Grant funding.
Author contributions  RS conceived and wrote the review paper. All 
authors contributed to specific sections and performed the literature 
research. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Adeleke R, Cloete E, Khasa D (2010) Isolation and identification of 
iron ore-solubilising fungus. S Afr J Sci 106:1–6. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​4102/​sajs.​v106i9/​10.​254
Ambreen N, Bhatti HN, Bhatti TM (2002) Bioleaching of bauxite by 
Penicillium simplicissimum. J Biol Sci 2:793–796. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​3923/​jbs.​2002.​793.​796
Amin MM, Elaassy IE, El-Feky MG, Sallam ASM, Talaat MS, Kawady 
NA (2014) Effect of mineral constituents in the bioleaching of 
uranium from uraniferous sedimentary rock samples, Southwest-
ern Sinai, Egypt. J Environ Radioact 134:76–82. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​jenvr​ad.​2014.​02.​024
Anand M, Crawford IA, Balat-Pichelin M, Abanades S, Van Westrenen 
W, Péraudeau G et al (2012) A brief review of chemical and 
mineralogical resources on the Moon and likely initial in situ 
resource utilization (ISRU) applications. Planet Space Sci 74:42–
48. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pss.​2012.​08.​012
Arai T, Takeda H, Yamaguchi A, Ohtake M (2008) A new model of 
lunar crust: asymmetry in crustal composition and evolution. 
Earth Planets Sp 60:433–444. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​BF033​
52808
Asghari I, Mousavi SM, Amiri F, Tavassoli S (2013) Bioleaching of 
spent refinery catalysts: a review. J Ind Eng Chem 19:1069–1081. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jiec.​2012.​12.​005
Ash RL, Dowler WL, Varsi G (1978) Feasibility of rocket propellant 
production on Mars. Acta Astronaut 5:705–724
Averesch NJH (2021) Choice of microbial system for in-situ resource 
utilization on mars. Front Astron Sp Sci 8:1–7. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3389/​fspas.​2021.​700370
Barnett MJ, Palumbo-Roe B, Gregory SP (2018) Comparison of heter-
otrophic bioleaching and ammonium sulfate ion exchange leach-
ing of rare earth elements from a Madagascan ion-adsorption 
clay. Minerals 8:1–11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​min80​60236
Baumstark-Khan C, Facius R (2002) Life under conditions of ioniz-
ing radiation. Astrobiology—the quest for the conditions of life. 
Springer, Berlin, pp 261–284
Bellenberg S, Díaz M, Noël N, Sand W, Poetsch A, Guiliani N et al 
(2014) Biofilm formation, communication and interactions of 
leaching bacteria during colonization of pyrite and sulfur sur-
faces. Res Microbiol 165:773–781. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
resmic.​2014.​08.​006
Berliner AJ, Hilzinger JM, Abel AJ, McNulty MJ, Makrygiorgos G, 
Averesch NJH et al (2021) Towards a biomanufactory on mars. 
Front Astron Sp Sci 8:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fspas.​2021.​
711550
Billi D, Mosca C, Fagliarone C, Napoli A, Verseux C, Baqué M et al 
(2019) Exposure to low Earth orbit of an extreme-tolerant cyano-
bacterium as a contribution to lunar astrobiology activities. Int J 
Astrobiol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S1473​55041​90001​68
Billi D, Gallego Fernandez B, Fagliarone C, Chiavarini S, Rothschild 
LJ (2021) Exploiting a perchlorate-tolerant desert cyanobacte-
rium to support bacterial growth for in situ resource utilization 
on Mars. Int J Astrobiol 20:29–35. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S1473​
55042​00003​00
Blowes DW, Ptacek CJ, Jambor JL, Weisener CG (2003) The geochem-
istry of acid mine drainage. In: Treatise on geochemistry, pp 
149–204. doi:https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​B0-​08-​043751-​6/​09137-4.
Bosecker K (1997) Bioleaching: metal solubilization by microorgan-
isms. FEMS Microbiol Rev 20:591–604. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​
S0168-​6445(97)​00036-3
Brandl H, Bosshard R, Wegmann M (1999) Computer-munching 
microbes: metal leaching from electronic scrap by bacteria and 
fungi. Process Metall 9:569–576. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S1572-​
4409(99)​80146-1
Brisson VL, Zhuang WQ, Alvarez-Cohen L (2016) Bioleaching of 
rare earth elements from monazite sand. Biotechnol Bioeng 
113:339–348. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bit.​25823
Brisson VL, Zhuang WQ, Alvarez-Cohen L (2020) Metabolomic 
analysis reveals contributions of citric and citramalic acids to 
rare earth bioleaching by a Paecilomyces fungus. Front Microbiol 
10:1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fmicb.​2019.​03008
Brounce M, Boyce J, McCubbin FM, Humphreys J, Reppart J, Stolper 
E et al (2019) The oxidation state of sulfur in lunar apatite. Am 
Mineral 104:307–312. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2138/​am-​2019-​6804
Brounce M, Boyce JW, Barnes J, McCubbin FM (2020) Sulfur in the 
apollo lunar basalts and implications for future sample-return 
missions. Elements 16:361–362. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2138/​GSELE​
MENTS.​16.5.​361
Brown II, Garrison DH, Jones JA, Allen CC, Sanders G, Sarkisova SA 
et al (2008) The development and perspectives of Bio-ISRU. In: 
Joint Annual Meeting of LEAG-ICEUM-SRR.
Brune KD, Bayer TS (2012) Engineering microbial consortia to 
enhance biomining and bioremediation. Front Microbiol 3:1–6. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fmicb.​2012.​00203
Bryan CG, Watkin EL, McCredden TJ, Wong ZR, Harrison STL, Kak-
sonen AH (2015) The use of pyrite as a source of lixiviant in the 
bioleaching of electronic waste. Hydrometallurgy 152:33–43. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​hydro​met.​2014.​12.​004
Buetti-Dinh A, Herold M, Christel S, Hajjami ME, Bellenberg S, Ilie 
O et al (2020) Systems biology of acidophile biofilms for effi-
cient metal extraction. Sci Data 7:1–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41597-​020-​0519-2
Byloos B, Coninx I, Van Hoey O, Cockell C, Nicholson N, Ilyin V et al 
(2017) The impact of space flight on survival and interaction of 
Cupriavidus metallidurans CH34 with basalt, a volcanic moon 
analog rock. Front Microbiol 8:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​
fmicb.​2017.​00671
Campins H, Hargrove K, Pinilla-Alonso N, Howell ES, Kelley MS, 
Licandro J et al (2010) Water ice and organics on the surface of 
the asteroid 24 Themis. Nature 464:1320–1321. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​natur​e09029

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 15 of 19 
7
Carter JL (1992) Lunar material resources: an overview. In: Space 
resources: materials 19–49.
Castelein SM, Aarts TF, Schleppi J, Hendrikx R, Böttger AJ, Benz D 
et al (2021) Iron can be microbially extracted from Lunar and 
Martian regolith simulants and 3D printed into tough structural 
materials. PLoS ONE 16:1–21. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​11.​
15.​382614
Cecal A, Humelnicu D, Popa K, Rudic V, Gulea A, Palamaru I et al 
(2000) Bioleaching of UO22+ ions from poor uranium ores by 
means of cyanobacteria. J Radioanal Nucl Chem 245:427–429. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1023/A:​10067​07815​553
Chen W (2012) The study of bioremediation on heavy metal of cultured 
seawater by Sphingomonas sp. XJ2 immobilized Sphingomonas 
strain. Adv Mater Res 347–353:1436–1441. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
4028/​www.​scien​tific.​net/​AMR.​347-​353.​1436
Clark BC (1993) Geochemical components in Martian soil. Geochim 
Cosmochim Acta 57:4575–4581. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0016-​
7037(93)​90183-W
Cockell CS (2010) Geomicrobiology beyond Earth: Microbe-mineral 
interactions in space exploration and settlement. Trends Micro-
biol 18:308–314. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​tim.​2010.​03.​005
Cockell CS (2011) Synthetic geomicrobiology: engineering microbe–
mineral interactions for space exploration and settlement. Int 
J Astrobiol 10:315–324. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S1473​55041​
10001​64
Cockell CS (2021) Bridging the gap between microbial limits and 
extremes in space: space microbial biotechnology in the next 
15 years. Microb Biotechnol 00:1–13. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​
1751-​7915.​13927
Cockell CS, Santomartino R (2021) Mining and microbiology for the 
solar system silicate and basalt economy. In: Hessel V, Stou-
demire J, Miyamoto H, Fisk ID (eds) Space manufacturing 
resources: earth and planetary exploration applications. Wiley, 
Hoboken
Cockell CS, Schuerger AC, Billi D, Friedmann EI, Panitz C (2005) 
Effects of a simulated martian UV flux on the Cyanobacterium, 
Chroococcidiopsis sp. 029. Astrobiology. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1089/​ast.​2005.5.​127
Cockell CS, Santomartino R, Finster K, Waajen AC, Eades LJ, Moe-
ller R et al (2020) Space station biomining experiment dem-
onstrates rare earth element extraction in microgravity and 
Mars gravity. Nat Commun 11:1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41467-​020-​19276-w
Cockell CS, Santomartino R, Finster KW, Waajen AC, Loudon C-M, 
Eades LJ et al (2021) Microbially-enhanced vanadium mining 
and bioremediation under micro- and mars gravity on the inter-
national space station. Front Microbiol 12:663. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3389/​fmicb.​2021.​641387
Coker JA (2016) Extremophiles and biotechnology: Current uses and 
prospects. F1000Research 5:1–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​12688/​f1000​
resea​rch.​7432.1
Coradini A, Capaccioni F, Erard S, Arnold G, De Sanctis MC, Filac-
chione G et al (2011) The surface composition and temperature 
of asteroid 21 Lutetia as observed by Rosetta/VIRTIS. Science 
334:492–494. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​12040​62
Cortesão M, de Haas A, Unterbusch R, Fujimori A, Schütze T, Meyer 
V et al (2020) Aspergillus niger spores are highly resistant to 
space radiation. Front Microbiol 11:1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3389/​fmicb.​2020.​00560
Daly MJ (2000) Engineering radiation-resistant bacteria for environ-
mental biotechnology. Curr Opin Biotechnol 11:280–285. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0958-​1669(00)​00096-3
De Sanctis MC, Ammannito E, McSween HY, Raponi A, Marchi S, 
Capaccioni F et al (2017) Localized aliphatic organic material 
on the surface of Ceres. Science 355:719–722. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1126/​scien​ce.​aaj23​05
Díaz-Rullo J, Rodríguez-Valdecantos G, Torres-Rojas F, Cid L, Vargas 
IT, González B et al (2021) Mining for perchlorate resistance 
genes in microorganisms from sediments of a hypersaline pond in 
Atacama Desert Chile. Front Microbiol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​
fmicb.​2021.​723874
Din G, Hassan A, Rafiq M, Hasan F, Badshah M, Khan S et al (2020) 
Characterization of Organic acid producing Aspergillus tubingen-
sis FMS1 and its role in metals leaching from soil. Geomicrobiol 
J 37:336–344. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01490​451.​2019.​17015​85
Eckart P (1992) Bioregenerative life support concepts. In: Spaceflight 
life support and biospherics, p 249–364.
Ehlmann BL, Edwards CS (2014) Mineralogy of the Martian surface. 
Annu Rev Earth Planet Sci 42:291–315. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​
annur​ev-​earth-​060313-​055024
Eichler A, Hadland N, Pickett D, Masaitis D, Handy D, Perez A et al 
(2021) Challenging the agricultural viability of Martian regolith 
simulants. Icarus 354:114022. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​icarus.​
2020.​114022
El Fadli KI, Cerveny RS, Burt CC, Eden P, Parker D, Brunet M et al 
(2013) World meteorological organization assessment of the 
purported world record 58 °C temperature extreme at el Azizia, 
Libya (13 September 1922). Bull Am Meteorol Soc 94:199–204. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1175/​BAMS-D-​12-​00093.1
Fahrion J, Mastroleo F, Dussap CG, Leys N (2021) Use of photobio-
reactors in regenerative life support systems for human space 
exploration. Front Microbiol 12:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​
fmicb.​2021.​699525
Faraji F, Golmohammadzadeh R, Rashchi F, Alimardani N (2018) 
Fungal bioleaching of WPCBs using Aspergillus niger: obser-
vation, optimization and kinetics. J Environ Manag 217:775–787. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jenvm​an.​2018.​04.​043
Franz A, Burgstaller W, Schinner F (1991) Leaching with Penicil-
lium simplicissimum: influence of metals and buffers on proton 
extrusion and citric acid production. Appl Environ Microbiol 
57:769–774
Franz HB, Trainer MG, Malespin CA, Mahaffy PR, Atreya SK, Becker 
RH et al (2017) Initial SAM calibration gas experiments on Mars: 
Quadrupole mass spectrometer results and implications. Planet 
Space Sci 138:44–54. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pss.​2017.​01.​014
Franz HB, King PL, Gaillard F (2019) Sulfur on Mars from the atmos-
phere to the core. In: Volatiles in the martian crust ed. E. Inc., 
pp 119–183. doi:https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​B978-0-​12-​804191-​8.​
00006-4.
Gadd GM (1999) Fungal production of citric and oxalic acid: Impor-
tance in metal speciation, physiology and biogeochemical pro-
cesses. Elsevier Masson SAS. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0065-​
2911(08)​60165-4
Gadd GM (2010) Metals, minerals and microbes: geomicrobiology and 
bioremediation. Microbiology 156:609–643. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1099/​mic.0.​037143-0
Gaffey MJ (1992) Ground-based observation of near-earth asteroids. 
In: Space resources: materials 50–58
Gertsch RE (1992) Asteroid mining. In: Space resources: materials 
111–120
Giese EC, Carpen HL, Bertolino LC, Schneider CL (2019) Charac-
terization and bioleaching of nickel laterite ore using Bacillus 
subtilis strain. Biotechnol Prog. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​btpr.​2860
Gnida A (2020) What do we know about the influence of vacuum 
on bacterial biocenosis used in environmental biotechnologies ? 
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 104:101–106. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s00253-​019-​10213-6
Gòdia F, Albiol J, Montesinos JL, Pérez J, Creus N, Cabello F et al 
(2002) MELISSA: a loop of interconnected bioreactors to 
develop life support in Space. J Biotechnol 99:319–330. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0168-​1656(02)​00222-5

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 16 of 19
González-Toril E, Martínez-Frías J, Gómez Gómez JM, Rull F, Amils 
R (2005) Iron meteorites can support the growth of acidophilic 
chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms. Astrobiology 5:406–414
Greenwood JP, Mojzsis SJ, Coath CD (2000) Sulfur isotopic composi-
tions of individual sulfides in Martian meteorites ALH840001 
and Nakhla: implications for crust-regolith exchanges on Mars. 
Earth Planet Sci Lett 184:23–35. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0012-​
821X(00)​00301-0
Gronstal A, Pearson V, Kappler A, Dooris C, Anand M, Poitrasson F 
et al (2009) Laboratory experiments on the weathering of iron 
meteorites and carbonaceous chondrites by iron-oxidizing bac-
teria. Meteorit Planet Sci 44:233–247. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​
1945-​5100.​2009.​tb007​31.x
Gumulya Y, Boxall NJ, Khaleque HN, Santala V, Carlson RP, Kak-
sonen AH (2018) In a quest for engineering acidophiles for 
biomining applications: challenges and opportunities. Genes 
(basel). https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​genes​90201​16
Haberle RM (2015) Solar system/sun, atmospheres, evolution of atmos-
pheres: planetary atmospheres: mars. Second edition. Elsevier, 
Amsterdam. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​B978-0-​12-​382225-​3.​
00312-1
Hallberg KB, Grail BM, Plessis CAD, Johnson DB (2011) Reduc-
tive dissolution of ferric iron minerals: a new approach for bio-
processing nickel laterites. Miner Eng 24:620–624. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​mineng.​2010.​09.​005
Hecht MH, Kounaves SP, Quinn RC, Wesy SJ, Young SMM, Ming DW 
et al (2009) Detection of perchlorate and the soluble chemistry 
of martian soil at the phoenix lander site. Science 325:64–67
Heinz J, Krahn T, Schulze-Makuch D (2020) A new record for micro-
bial perchlorate tolerance: fungal growth in NaClO4 brines and 
its implications for putative life on Mars. Life 10:4–11. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3390/​life1​00500​53
Horneck G, Klaus DM, Mancinelli RL (2010) Space microbiology. 
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 74:121–156. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1128/​
MMBR.​00016-​09
Horneck G, Moeller R, Cadet J, Douki T, Mancinelli RL, Nicholson 
WL et al (2012) Resistance of bacterial endospores to outer space 
for planetary protection purposes-experiment PROTECT of the 
EXPOSE-E Mission. Astrobiology 12:445–456. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1089/​ast.​2011.​0737
Hosseini Nasab M, Noaparast M, Abdollahi H, Amoozegar MA (2020) 
Indirect bioleaching of Co and Ni from iron rich laterite ore, 
using metabolic carboxylic acids generated by P. putida, P. 
koreensis, P. bilaji and A. niger. Hydrometallurgy 193:105309. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​hydro​met.​2020.​105309
Housen KR, Wilkening LL, Chapman CR, Greenberg R (1979) Aster-
oidal regoliths. Icarus 39:317–351. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0019-​
1035(79)​90145-3
Huang B, Li DG, Huang Y, Liu CT (2018) Effects of spaceflight 
and simulated microgravity on microbial growth and second-
ary metabolism. Mil Med Res 5:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​
s40779-​018-​0162-9
Huang W, Ertekin E, Wang T, Cruz L, Dailey M, DiRuggiero J et al 
(2020) Mechanism of water extraction from gypsum rock 
by desert colonizing microorganisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
117:10681–10687. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​20016​13117
Hughes DW (1994) The historical unravelling of the diameters of the 
first four asteroids. Q J R Astron Soc 35:331–344
ISECG (2013) Benefits stemming from space exploration. ESA Publ. 
1–22. http://​www.​globa​lspac​eexpl​orati​on.​org/​wordp​ress/​wp-​
conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​2013/​10/​Benef​its-​Stemm​ing-​from-​Space-​Explo​
ration-​2013.​pdf.
Jaafar R, Al-Sulami A, Al-Taee A, Aldoghachi F, Napes S (2015) 
Biosorption and bioaccumulation of some heavy met-
als by Deinococcus Radiodurans isolated from soil in basra 
governorate—Iraq. J Biotechnol Biomater. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
4172/​2155-​952x.​10001​90
Jamanca-Lino G (2021) Space resources engineering: ilmenite deposits 
for oxygen production on the moon. Am J Min Metall 6:6–11. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​12691/​ajmm-6-​1-2
Jeong SW, Choi YJ (2020) Extremophilic microorganisms for the treat-
ment of toxic pollutants in the environment. Molecules 25:13–15. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​molec​ules2​52149​16
Jerez CA (2017a) Biomining of metals: how to access and exploit 
natural resource sustainably. Microb Biotechnol 10:1191–1193. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​1751-​7915.​12792
Jerez CA (2017b) Metal extraction and biomining, 4th edn. Elsevier 
Inc, Amsterdam
Johansson KR (1992) Bioprocessing of ores: application to space 
resources. In: Space resources: materials, pp 222–241
Johnson DB (2014) Biomining-biotechnologies for extracting and 
recovering metals from ores and waste materials. Curr Opin Bio-
technol 30:24–31. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​copbio.​2014.​04.​008
Johnson DB (2018) The evolution, current status, and future prospects 
of using biotechnologies in the mineral extraction and metal 
recovery sectors. Minerals 8:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​min80​
80343
Johnson DB, Roberto FF (1997) Heterotrophic Acidophiles and their 
roles in the bioleaching of sulfide minerals. Biomining. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​662-​06111-4_​13
Johnson DB, Grail BM, Hallberg KB (2013) A new direction for 
biomining: extraction of metals by reductive dissolution of oxi-
dized ores. Minerals 3:49–58. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​min30​
10049
Jolliff B (2008) Lunar mineralogy and global distribution on the 
moon’s surface. EPSC Abstr 3:4–5
Jolliff BL, Gillis JJ, Haskin LA, Korotev RL, Wieczorek MA (2000) 
Major lunar crustal terranes: Surface expressions and crust-
mantle origins. J Geophys Res E Planets 105:4197–4216. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​1999J​E0011​03
Keller RJ, Porter W, Goli K, Rosenthal R, Butler N, Jones JA (2021) 
Biologically-based and physiochemical life support and in situ 
resource utilization for exploration of the solar system—
reviewing the current state and defining future development 
needs. Life. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​life1​10808​44
Kim W, Tengra FK, Young Z, Shong J, Marchand N, Chan HK et al 
(2013) Spaceflight Promotes Biofilm Formation by Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. PLoS ONE 8:e62437. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00624​37
Klas M, Tsafnat N, Dennerley J, Beckmann S, Osborne B, Dempster 
AG et al (2015) Biomining and methanogenesis for resource 
extraction from asteroids. Space Policy 34:18–22. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​space​pol.​2015.​08.​002
Kölbl D, Pignitter M, Somoza V, Schimak MP, Strbak O, Blazevic A 
et al (2017) Exploring fingerprints of the extreme thermoaci-
dophile Metallosphaera sedula grown on synthetic martian 
regolith materials as the sole energy sources. Front Microbiol 
8:1–11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fmicb.​2017.​01918
Kounaves SP, Chaniotakis NA, Chevrier VF, Carrier BL, Folds KE, 
Hansen VM et al (2014) Identification of the perchlorate parent 
salts at the Phoenix Mars landing site and possible implica-
tions. Icarus 232:226–231. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​icarus.​
2014.​01.​016
Krasinsky GA, Pitjeva EV, Vasilyev MV, Yagudina EI (2002) Hidden 
mass in the asteroid belt. Icarus 158:98–105. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1006/​icar.​2002.​6837
Lasseur C, Mergeay M (2021) Current and future ways to closed 
life support systems: virtual MELiSSA conference, Ghent (B) 
(3–5/11/2020) a review. Ecol Eng Environ Prot 1:25–35
Lauretta DS, DellaGiustina DN, Bennett CA, Golish DR, Becker 
KJ, Balram-Knutson SS et al (2019) The unexpected surface 

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 17 of 19 
7
of asteroid (101955) Bennu. Nature 568:55–60. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41586-​019-​1033-6
Lawson SL, Feldman WC, Lawrence DJ, Moore KR, Elphic RC, 
Belian RD et al (2005) Recent outgassing from the lunar sur-
face: the lunar prospector alpha particle spectrometer. J Geo-
phys Res E Planets 110:1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​2005J​
E0024​33
Levicán G, Ugalde JA, Ehrenfeld N, Maass A, Parada P (2008) Com-
parative genomic analysis of carbon and nitrogen assimilation 
mechanisms in three indigenous bioleaching bacteria: predictions 
and validations. BMC Genomics 9:1–19. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​
1471-​2164-9-​581
Lewicki C, Diamandis P, Anderson E, Voorhees C, Mycroft F (2013) 
Planetary resources—the asteroid mining company. New Sp 
1:105–108. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1089/​space.​2013.​0013
Lewis JS (1992). Asteroid resources. In: Space resources: materials, 
p 59–78
Linnarsson D, Carpenter J, Fubini B, Gerde P, Karlsson LL, Loftus DJ 
et al (2012) Toxicity of lunar dust. Planet Space Sci 74:57–71. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pss.​2012.​05.​023
Liu Y, Cockell CS, Wang G, Hu C, Chen L, De Philippis R (2008) 
Control of lunar and martian dust-experimental insights from 
artificial and natural cyanobacterial and algal crusts in the desert 
of Inner Mongolia, China. Astrobiology 8:75–86. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1089/​ast.​2007.​0122
Liu W, Lin J, Pang X, Cui S, Mi S, Lin J (2011) Overexpression of rus-
ticyanin in Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans ATCC19859 increased 
Fe(II) oxidation activity. Curr Microbiol 62:320–324. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s00284-​010-​9708-0
Liu M, Dong F, Zhang W, Kang W, Nie X, Wei H et al (2012) 
Biosorption of uranium by Deinococcus radiodurans cells 
under culture conditions. Adv Mater Res 535–537:2446–2449. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​4028/​www.​scien​tific.​net/​AMR.​535-​537.​2446
Liu W, Lin J, Pang X, Mi S, Cui S, Lin J (2013) Increases of fer-
rous iron oxidation activity and arsenic stressed cell growth 
by overexpression of Cyc2 in Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans 
ATCC19859. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 60:623–628. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bab.​1110
Maneesuwannarat S, Kudpeng K, Yingchutrakul Y, Roytrakul S, van-
gnai AS, Yamashita M et al (2019) A possible protein model 
involved in gallium arsenide leaching by Cellulosimicrobium 
funkei. Miner Eng 137:207–216. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
mineng.​2019.​04.​002
Marrero J, Coto O, Schippers A (2020) Metal bioleaching: funda-
mentals and geobiotechnical application of aerobic and anaero-
bic acidophiles. In: Biotechnological applications of extremo-
philic microorganisms (De Gruyter), p 261–288. doi:https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1515/​97831​10424​331-​011.
Matsumoto T, Harries D, Langenhorst F, Miyake A, Noguchi T 
(2020) Iron whiskers on asteroid Itokawa indicate sulfide 
destruction by space weathering. Nat Commun 11:1–8. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41467-​020-​14758-3
Mattimore V, Battista JR (1996) Radioresistance of Deinococcus 
radiodurans: Functions necessary to survive ionizing radiation 
are also necessary to survive prolonged desiccation. J Bacteriol 
178:633–637. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1128/​jb.​178.3.​633-​637.​1996
McLean RJC, Cassanto JM, Barnes MB, Koo JH (2001) Bacte-
rial biofilm formation under microgravity conditions. FEMS 
Microbiol Lett 195:115–119. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0378-​
1097(00)​00549-8
McSween HY, Jeffrey Taylor G, Wyatt MB (2009) Elemental com-
position of the martian crust. Science 324:736–739. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​11658​71
Menezes AA, Cumbers J, Hogan JA, Arkin AP (2015a) Towards 
synthetic biological approaches to resource utilization on space 
missions. J R Soc Interface. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2014.​
0715
Menezes AA, Montague MG, Cumbers J, Hogan JA, Arkin AP (2015b) 
Grand challenges in space synthetic biology. J R Soc Interface. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1098/​rsif.​2015.​0803
Mergelov N, Mueller CW, Prater I, Shorkunov I, Dolgikh A, Zazovs-
kaya E et al (2018) Alteration of rocks by endolithic organisms 
is one of the pathways for the beginning of soils on Earth. Sci 
Rep. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​018-​21682-6
Metzger PT (2016) Space development and space science together, an 
historic opportunity. Space Policy 37:77–91. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​space​pol.​2016.​08.​004
Metzger PT, Britt DT (2020) Model for asteroid regolith to guide simu-
lant development. Icarus 350:113904. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
icarus.​2020.​113904
Metzger PT, Zacny K, Morrison P (2020) Thermal extraction of vola-
tiles from lunar and asteroid regolith in axisymmetric Crank-
Nicolson modeling. J Aerosp Eng 33:04020075. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1061/​(asce)​as.​1943-​5525.​00011​65
Meyer C (2003) Lunar sample mineralogy. In: NASA Lunar petro-
graphic educational thin section set, 8–9
Middleton SS, Latmani RB, Mackey MR, Ellisman MH, Tebo BM, 
Criddle CS (2003) Cometabolism of Cr(VI) by Shewanella onei-
densis MR-1 produces cell-associated reduced chromium and 
inhibits growth. Biotechnol Bioeng 83:627–637. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1002/​bit.​10725
Milojevic T, Kölbl D, Ferrière L, Albu M, Kish A, Flemming RL et al 
(2019) Exploring the microbial biotransformation of extrater-
restrial material on nanometer scale. Sci Rep 9:1–11. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​019-​54482-7
Milojevic T, Albu M, Kölbl D, Kothleitner G, Bruner R, Mor-
gan ML (2021) Chemolithotrophy on the Noachian Martian 
breccia NWA 7034 via experimental microbial biotransfor-
mation. Commun Earth Environ. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s43247-​021-​00105-x
Minton KW (1996) Repair of ionizing-radiation damage in the radia-
tion resistant bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans. Mutat Res 
DNA Repair 363:1–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0921-​8777(95)​
00014-3
Mishra D, Rhee YH (2014) Microbial leaching of metals from solid 
industrial wastes. J Microbiol 52:1–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s12275-​014-​3532-3
Moeller R, Raguse M, Reitz G, Okayasu R, Li Z, Klein S et al (2014) 
Resistance of Bacillus subtilis spore DNA to lethal ionizing 
radiation damage relies primarily on spore core components 
and DNA repair, with minor effects of oxygen radical detoxi-
fication. Appl Environ Microbiol 80:104–109. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1128/​AEM.​03136-​13
Montague M, McArthur GH, Cockell CS, Held J, Marshall W, Sher-
man LA et al (2012) The role of synthetic biology for in situ 
resource utilization (ISRU). Astrobiology 12:1135–1142. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1089/​ast.​2012.​0829
Murphy JR, Leovy CB, Tillman JE (1990) Observations of Martian 
surface winds at the Viking Lander 1 site. J Geophys Res. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​jb095​ib09p​14555
Musk E (2017) Making humans a multi-planetary species. New Sp 
5:46–61
Nangle SN, Wolfson MY, Hartsough L, Ma NJ, Mason CE, Merighi 
M et al (2020) The case for biotech on Mars. Nat Biotechnol 
38:401–407. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41587-​020-​0485-4
NASA-ASEE (1992) Space resources: materials. NASA Sci Tech 
Inf Progr 3
Nicholson WL, Ricco AJ (2020) Nanosatellites for biology in space: 
In situ measurement of Bacillus subtilis spore germination and 
growth after 6 months in low earth orbit on the O/OREOS 
mission. Life 10:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​life1​00100​01

	
Extremophiles (2022) 26:7
1 3
7 
Page 18 of 19
Niederwieser T, Kociolek P, Hoehn A, Klaus D (2019). Effect of 
altered nitrogen partial pressure on Chlorellaceae for space-
flight applications. Algal Res 41
Noël N, Florian B, Sand W (2010) AFM & EFM study on attach-
ment of acidophilic leaching organisms. Hydrometallurgy 
104:370–375. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​hydro​met.​2010.​02.​021
Ohmura N, Sasaki K, Matsumoto N, Saiki H (2002) Anaerobic res-
piration Using Fe3+, S0, and H2 in the chemolithoautotrophic 
bacterium Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. J Bacteriolo 184:7. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1128/​JB.​184.8.​2081
Ohtake M, Matsunaga T, Haruyama J, Yokota Y, Morota T, Honda 
C et al (2009) The global distribution of pure anorthosite on 
the Moon. Nature 461:236–240. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​natur​
e08317
Okada T, Fukuhara T, Tanaka S, Taguchi M, Arai T, Senshu H et al 
(2020) Highly porous nature of a primitive asteroid revealed by 
thermal imaging. Nature 579:518–522. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41586-​020-​2102-6
Olson GJ, Brierley JA, Brierley CL (2003) Bioleaching review part B: 
progress in bioleaching: Applications of microbial processes by 
the minerals industries. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 63:249–257. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00253-​003-​1404-6
Olsson-Francis K, Cockell CS (2010) Use of cyanobacteria for in-situ 
resource use in space applications. Planet Space Sci 58:1279–
1285. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pss.​2010.​05.​005
Payré V, Fabre C, Sautter V, Cousin A, Mangold N, Deit LL et al 
(2019) Copper enrichments in the Kimberley formation in Gale 
crater, Mars: evidence for a Cu deposit at the source. Icarus 
321:736–751. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​icarus.​2018.​12.​015
Pollard EC (1965) Theoretical studies on living systems in the absence 
of mechanical stress. J Theor Biol 8:113–123. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/​0022-​5193(65)​90097-4
Prölss GW (2004) Absorption and dissipation of solar wind energy. 
In: Physics of the earth’s space environment, pp 349–399. 
doi:https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​97123-5_7.
Qiu MQ, Xiong SY, Zhang WM, Wang GX (2005) A comparison of 
bioleaching of chalcopyrite using pure culture or a mixed cul-
ture. Miner Eng 18:987–990. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​mineng.​
2005.​01.​004
Raafat K, Burnett JA, Chapman T, Cockell CS (2013) The physics of 
mining in space. A&g. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​04343​7c0
Rawlings DE, Johnson DB (2007) The microbiology of biomining: 
development and optimization of mineral-oxidizing microbial 
consortia. Microbiology 153:315–324. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1099/​
mic.0.​2006/​001206-0
Reed DW, Fujita Y, Daubaras DL, Jiao Y, Thompson VS (2016) 
Bioleaching of rare earth elements from waste phosphors and 
cracking catalysts. Hydrometallurgy 166:34–40. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​hydro​met.​2016.​08.​006
Rieder R, Economou T, Wänke H, Turkevich A, Crisp J, Brückner J 
et al (1997) The chemical composition of martian soil and rocks 
returned by the mobile alpha proton x-ray spectrometer: pre-
liminary results from the X-ray mode. Science 278:1771–1774. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​278.​5344.​1771
Righter K, Go BM, Pando KA, Danielson L, Ross DK, Rahman Z et al 
(2017) Phase equilibria of a low S and C lunar core: implications 
for an early lunar dynamo and physical state of the current core. 
Earth Planet Sci Lett 463:323–332. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​epsl.​
2017.​02.​003
Rohwerder T, Gehrke T, Kinzler K, Sand W (2003) Bioleaching review 
part A: progress in bioleaching: fundamentals and mechanisms 
of bacterial metal sulfide oxidation. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 
63:239–248. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00253-​003-​1448-7
Rothschild LJ (2016) Synthetic biology meets bioprinting: enabling 
technologies for humans on Mars (and Earth). Biochem Soc 
Trans 44:1158–1164. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1042/​BST20​160067
Rozas EE, Mendes MA, Nascimento CAO, Espinosa DCR, Oliveira 
R, Oliveira G et al (2017) Bioleaching of electronic waste using 
bacteria isolated from the marine sponge Hymeniacidon heli-
ophila (Porifera). J Hazard Mater 329:120–130. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​jhazm​at.​2017.​01.​037
Sand W, Gehrke T, Jozsa P, Schippers A (2001) (Bio) chemistry of bac-
terial leaching—direct vs. indirect bioleaching. Hydro 59:159–
175. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0304-​386X(00)​00180-8
Santomartino R, Waajen AC, Wit WD, Nicholson N, Parmitano L, 
Loudon C et al (2020) No effect of microgravity and simulated 
mars gravity on final bacterial cell concentrations on the interna-
tional space station: applications to space bioproduction. Front 
Microbiol 11:1–15. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fmicb.​2020.​579156
Schippers A, Sand W (1999) Bacterial leaching of metal sulfides pro-
ceeds by two indirect mechanisms via thiosulfate or via poly-
sulfides and sulfur. Appl Environ Microbiol 65:319–321. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1128/​aem.​65.1.​319-​321.​1999
Schippers A, Hedrich S, Vasters J, Drobe M, Sand W, Willscher S 
(2013) Biomining: metal recovery from ores with microorgan-
isms. Geobiotechnol i Adv Biochem Eng 141:1–47. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​10_​2013_​216
Schuerger AC, Nicholson WL (2016) Twenty species of hypobarophilic 
bacteria recovered from diverse soils exhibit growth under simu-
lated martian conditions at 0.7 kPa. Astrobiology 16:964–976. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1089/​ast.​2016.​1587
Schwandt C, Hamilton JA, Fray DJ, Crawford IA (2012) The produc-
tion of oxygen and metal from lunar regolith. Planet Space Sci 
74:49–56. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pss.​2012.​06.​011
Schwendner P, Schuerger AC (2020) Exploring microbial activity in 
low-pressure environments. Curr Issues Mol Biol 38:163–196. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​21775/​cimb.​038.​163
Senatore G, Mastroleo F, Leys N, Mauriello G (2018) Effect of micro-
gravity and space radiation on microbes. Fut Microbiol 13:831–
847. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2217/​fmb-​2017-​0251
Singh S (2020) Biosorption of heavy metals by cyanobacteria: potential 
of live and dead cells in bioremediation. Microbial bioremedia-
tion and biodegradation. Springer, Berlin, pp 409–424
Singh S, Cameotra SS (2015) Anaerobic bioleaching by acidophilic 
bacterial strains. In: Sukla LB, Pradhan N, Panda S, Mishra BK 
(eds) Environmental microbial biotechnology. Springer, Berlin, 
pp 179–201
Sivakumar V, Neelakantan R, Santosh M (2017) Lunar surface mineral-
ogy using hyperspectral data: Implications for primordial crust 
in the Earth–Moon system. Geosci Front 8:457–465. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​gsf.​2016.​03.​005
Slenzka K, Kempf J (2010) Bio-ISRU concepts using microorganisms 
to release ­O2 and ­H2 on Moon and Mars. In: 38th COSPAR Sci-
entific Assembly 2010
Srichandan H, Mohapatra RK, Parhi PK, Mishra S (2019) Bioleaching 
approach for extraction of metal values from secondary solid 
wastes: a critical review. Hydrometallurgy 189:105122. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​hydro​met.​2019.​105122
Steenstra ES, Agmon N, Berndt J, Klemme S, Matveev S, Van 
Westrenen W (2018) Depletion of potassium and sodium in man-
tles of Mars, Moon and Vesta by core formation. Sci Rep 8:1–10. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​018-​25505-6
Steenstra ES, Berndt J, Klemme S, Rohrbach A, Bullock ES, van 
Westrenen W (2020) An experimental assessment of the poten-
tial of sulfide saturation of the source regions of eucrites and 
angrites: Implications for asteroidal models of core formation, 
late accretion and volatile element depletions. Geochim Cosmo-
chim Acta 269:39–62. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​gca.​2019.​10.​006

Extremophiles (2022) 26:7	
1 3
Page 19 of 19 
7
Stern SA (1999) The lunar atmosphere: history, status, current prob-
lems, and context. Rev Geophys 37:453–491. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1029/​1999R​G9000​05
Stevens AH, Childers D, Fox-powell M, Nicholson N, Jhoti E, Cockell 
CS (2019) Growth, viability, and death of planktonic and biofilm 
Sphingomonas desiccabilis in simulated martian brines. Astrobi-
ology 19:87–98. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1089/​ast.​2018.​1840
Tait AW, Gagen EJ, Wilson SA, Tomkins AG, Southam G (2017) 
Microbial populations of stony meteorites: substrate controls on 
first colonizers. Front Microbiol 8:1–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​
fmicb.​2017.​01227
Taylor GJ (2013) The bulk composition of Mars. Chem Erde 73:401–
420. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chemer.​2013.​09.​006
Taylor SR, Taylor GJ, Taylor LA (2006) The moon: a taylor perspec-
tive. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 70:5904–5918. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1016/j.​gca.​2006.​06.​262
Tsuchiyama A, Uesugi M, Matsushima T, Michikami T, Kadono T, 
Nakamura T et al (2011) Evolution of Itokawa regoliththree-
dimensional structure of hayabusa samples: origin and evolution 
of itokawa regolith. Science 333:1125–1128
Turner J, Anderson P, Lachlan-Cope T, Colwell S, Phillips T, Kirch-
gaessner A et al (2009) Record low surface air temperature at 
Vostok station, Antarctica. J Geophys Res Atmos 114:1–14. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​2009J​D0121​04
Ulrich N, Nagler K, Laue M, Cockell CS, Setlow P, Id RM (2018) 
Experimental studies addressing the longevity of Bacillus subtilis 
spores—The first data from a 500-year experiment. 1–14.
Valix M (2017) Bioleaching of electronic waste: milestones and chal-
lenges. Elsevier BV, Amsterdam
Verseux C (2020) Bacterial growth at low pressure : a short review. 
Front Astron Sp Sci 7:1–10. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fspas.​2020.​
00030
Verseux C, Baqué M, Lehto K, De Vera JPP, Rothschild LJ, Billi D 
(2016) Sustainable life support on Mars—the potential roles of 
cyanobacteria. Int J Astrobiol 15:65–92. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​
S1473​55041​50002​1X
Verseux C, Heinicke C, Ramalho T, Determann J, Smagin M, Avila 
M (2021) A low-pressure, N2/CO2 atmosphere is suitable for 
cyanobacterium-based life-support systems on Mars. Front 
Microbiol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fmicb.​2021.​611798
Volger R, Pettersson GM, Brouns SJJ, Rothschild LJ, Cowley A, Leh-
ner BAE (2020) Mining moon and mars with microbes: biologi-
cal approaches to extract iron from Lunar and Martian regolith. 
Planet Space Sci 184:104850. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​pss.​2020.​
104850
Volponi M, Lasseur C (2020) Considerations on life support systems 
for interstellar travel: a regenerative story. Acta Fut 12:133–149. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​5281/​zenodo.​37473​56
Wadsworth J, Cockell CS (2017) Perchlorates on Mars enhance the 
bacteriocidal effects of UV light. Sci Rep 7:1–8. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1038/​s41598-​017-​04910-3
Wang Z, Becker H (2017) Chalcophile elements in Martian meteorites 
indicate low sulfur content in the Martian interior and a volatile 
element-depleted late veneer. Earth Planet Sci Lett 463:56–68. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​epsl.​2017.​01.​023
Williams JP, Paige DA, Greenhagen BT, Sefton-Nash E (2017) The 
global surface temperatures of the moon as measured by the 
diviner lunar radiometer experiment. Icarus 283:300–325. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​icarus.​2016.​08.​012
Wittenberg LJ, Santarius JF, Kulcinski GL (1986) Lunar source of 3 
He for commercial fusion power. Fusion Technol 10:167–178. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​13182/​FST86-​A24972
Yamada-Onodera K, Mukumoto H, Katsuyama Y, Tani Y (2002) Deg-
radation of long-chain alkanes by a polyethylene-degrading fun-
gus Penicillium Simplicissimum YK. Enzyme Microb Technol 
30:828–831. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0141-​0229(02)​00065-0
Yen AS, Gellert R, Schröder C, Morris RV, Bell JF, Knudson AT et al 
(2005) An integrated view of the chemistry and mineralogy of 
martian soils. Nature 436:49–54. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​natur​
e03637
Yoshizaki T, McDonough WF (2020) The composition of Mars. Geo-
chim Cosmochim Acta 273:137–162. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
gca.​2020.​01.​011
Yoshizaki T, McDonough WF (2021) Earth and mars—distinct inner 
solar system products. Chem Erde 81:125746. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​chemer.​2021.​125746
Yu R, Liu J, Tan J, Zeng W, Shi L, Gu G et al (2014) Effect of pH 
values on the extracellular polysaccharide secreted by Acid-
ithiobacillus ferrooxidans during chalcopyrite bioleaching. Int 
J Miner Metall Mater 21:311–316. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s12613-​014-​0910-0
Zea L (2015) Phenotypic and gene expression responses of E. coli 
to antibiotics during spaceflight. Doctoral dissertation, Univ. 
Colorado. Boulder, Colorado, USA. https://​www.​color​ado.​edu/​
facul​ty/​zea-​luis/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​attac​hed-​files/​zea_-_​thesi​s_-_​
publi​shed.​pdf.
Zea L, Prasad N, Levy SE, Stodieck L, Jones A, Shrestha S et al (2016) 
A molecular genetic basis explaining altered bacterial behavior 
in space. PLoS ONE 2:1–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​
pone.​01643​59
Zea L, Larsen M, Estante F, Qvortrup K, Moeller R, de Oliveira SD 
et al (2017) Phenotypic changes exhibited by E. coli cultured 
in space. Front Microbiol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fmicb.​2017.​
01598
Zea L, Nisar Z, Rubin P, Luo J, Mcbride SA, Moeller R et al (2018) 
Design of a spaceflight biofilm experiment. Acta Astronaut 
148:294–300. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​actaa​stro.​2018.​04.​039
Zea L, Mclean RJC, Rook TA, Angle G, Carter DL, Delegard A et al 
(2020) Potential biofilm control strategies for extended space-
flight missions. Biofilm. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bioflm.​2020.​
100026
Zeitlin C, Hassler DM, Cucinotta FA, Ehresmann B, Wimmer-Schwe-
ingruber RF, Brinza DE, Kang S, Weigle G, Böttcher S, Böhm 
E, Burmeister S, Guo J, Köhler J, Martin C, Posner A, Rafkin 
S, Reitz G (2013) Measurements of energetic particle radia-
tion in transit to Mars on the Mars science laboratory. Science 
340(6136):1080–1084. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​12359​89
Zhang S, Wimmer-Schweingruber RF, Yu J, Wang CC, Fu Q, Zou Y 
et al (2020) First measurements of the radiation dose on the lunar 
surface. Sci Adv 6:1–6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​sciadv.​aaz13​34
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
