FOR THE RECORD
The oligomeric state of the truncated
mechanosensitive channel of large
conductance shows no variance in vivo
Irene Iscla, Robin Wray, and Paul Blount*
Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
Received 12 May 2011; Revised 20 June 2011; Accepted 21 June 2011
DOI: 10.1002/pro.686
Published online 7 July 2011 proteinscience.org
Abstract: The mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL) from E. coli serves as an
emergency release valve allowing the cell to survive acute osmotic downshock. It is one of the best
studied mechanosensitive channels and serves as a paradigm for how a protein can sense and
respond to membrane tension. Two MscL crystal structures of the orthologs M. tuberculosis and
S. aureus have been solved showing pentameric and tetrameric structures, respectively. Several
studies followed to understand whether the discrepancy in their stoichiometry was a species
difference or a consequence of the protein manipulation for crystallization. Two independent studies
now agree that the full-length S. aureus MscL is actually a pentamer, not tetramer. While detergents
appear to play a role in modifying the oligomeric state of the protein, a cytoplasmic helical bundle
has also been implicated. Here, we evaluate the role of the C-terminal region of S. aureus MscL in
the oligomerization of the channel in native membranes by using an in vivo disulfide-trapping
technique. We find that the oligomeric state of S. aureus MscLs with different C-terminal
truncations, including the one used to obtain the tetrameric S. aureus MscL crystal structure, are
pentamers in vivo. Thus, the C-terminal domain of the S. aureus protein only plays a critical role in
the oligomeric state of the SaMscL protein when it is solubilized in detergent.
Keywords: mechanosensitive channel; oligomerization; detergent solubilization; stoichiometry;
disulfide trapping
Introduction
The E. coli mscL was the first gene definitively shown to encode a mechanosensitive channel activity.1 The
encoded mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL) protein (EcoMscL) is one of the best studied
Abbreviations: C8E5, pentaethylene glycol monooctyl ether; LDAO, n-dodecyl-N,N-dimethylamine-N-oxide; DDM, n-Dodecyl b-D-
maltoside; OG, n-Octyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside; EcoMscL, E. coli MscL; MtMscL, M. tuberculosis MscL; SaMscL, S. aureus MscL;
SDS, sodium dodecyl sulphate; DTT, dithiothreitol; OCAM, oligomer characterization by addition of mass.
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article.
Grant sponsor: Welch Foundation; Grant number: I-1420; Grant sponsor: NASA; Grant number: NNH08ZTT003N NRA; Grant
sponsor: Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas, (CPRIT); Grant number: RP100146; Grant sponsor: National Institutes
of Health; Grant number: GM61028.
*Correspondence to: Paul Blount, Department of Physiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines
Blvd, Dallas, TX 75290-9040. E-mail: Paul.Blount@utsouthwestern.edu
1638
PROTEIN SCIENCE 2011 VOL 20:1638—1642
Published by Wiley-Blackwell. V
C 2011 The Protein Society

mechanosensitive channels, serving as a paradigm
for how a protein can sense membrane tension.2 A
crystal
structure
from
M.
tuberculosis
MscL
(MtMscL) was first obtained by Douglas Rees’ group
in 1998, depicting what appeared to be a closed state
of the channel.3,4 It was a homopentamer with each
subunit containing two transmembrane domains and
a cytoplasmic C-terminal a-helical bundle. The same
group recently obtained a second crystal structure
from
a
C-terminal
truncated
S.
aureus
MscL
(SaMscL) in what they speculated to be an expanded
intermediate state; surprisingly, this was a tet-
ramer.5 A different oligomeric state was unexpected
given that the two orthologs are highly conserved
[Fig. 1(A)], as is the entire MscL family.6–8 To fur-
ther investigate the discrepancy between the stoichi-
ometry of these two channels, several studies have
been performed. In one study, we developed an
in vivo disulfide-trapping assay to determine the
state of the S. aureus channel when in its native
membrane environment; it was unambiguously a
pentamer, demonstrating that the crystal did not
reflect a native state of the protein.9 Thus, two
possibilities existed: either the truncation of the
C-terminal bundle altered channel stoichiometry to
tetramer, or the detergent solubilization did. Using
crosslinking, sedimentation equilibrium centrifuga-
tions and light scattering, we concluded that on sol-
ubilization with the detergent n-dodecyl-N,N-dime-
thylamine-N-oxide
(LDAO),
which
was
used
to
obtain the crystal structure, the channel reversibly
reorganizes as a tetramer; in contrast, TritonX-100
and pentaethylene glycol monooctyl ether (C8E5)
detergents did not alter stoichiometry.9 However, the
influence of protein truncation was not assessed.
Indeed, one previous study of in vitro translated
and
n-Octyl-Beta-D-Glucopyranoside
(OG)
solubi-
lized EcoMscL implied that the C-terminal end of
the protein played a critical role in assembly.10
Recently, using a new technique coined oligomer
characterization by addition of mass (OCAM), the
Rees’ group confirmed that both MtMscL, and full
length (FL) SaMscL are pentamers when solubilized
in n-Dodecyl b-D-maltoside (DDM); but they also
showed that a SaMscL with the C-terminal deletion,
as used in the crystallographic study, was heteroge-
neous in its oligomeric state, existing as both pen-
tamers and tetramers. Thus, it appeared that the C-
terminal helical bundle does influence the oligomeric
state of the protein. However, because both of these
Figure 1. Alignment of MscL homologs and protein modifications. A: Sequence alignment of three MscL homologs from
E. coli (EcoMscL), M. tuberculosis (MtMscL), and S. aureus (SaMscL) showing the regions corresponding to the different
protein domains. The degree of conservation is color coded with dark blue residues indicating identity and light blue similarity.
The red arrows at the C-terminal end of SaMscL sequence indicate the sites were the stop codons were added to generate the
different C-terminal truncated constructs. B: Localization of residues A10 (red) and L97 (blue) in M. tuberculosis MscL,
corresponding to L10 and M91 in SaMscL. These residues were substituted to cysteines for the in vivo disulfide trapping
experiments. A lateral view (left) and bottom view (right) are shown. C: Crystal structure of M. tuberculosis MscL, showing a
pentameric stoichiometry. The inset shows a detail of the C-terminal domain and the location of the C-terminal truncations.
Iscla et al.
PROTEIN SCIENCE VOL 20:1638—1642
1639

studies used detergent-solubilized proteins, it was
unclear if the C-terminal region of the protein
played a role in MscL stoichiometry in vivo. Here,
we utilize our in vivo disulfide-trapping assay to
address this issue.
To evaluate the role of the c-terminal region of
SaMscL in its oligomeric state, we have generated
multiple C-terminal truncated constructs of different
lengths that have two cysteine mutations (L10C/
M91C; Fig. 1). As can be seen in Figure 1(B), these
two sites are predicted to be in close proximity in
the closed state3 and have been shown previously to
generate the most efficient in vivo crosslinking.9 We
investigated the FL channel as well as four different
C-terminal deletions: D95 (which was the truncation
crystallized as a tetramer), D99, D103, and D107.
Two of these truncations, D95 and D99, are located
in the linker between TM2 and the cytoplasmic helix
and the other two are in the cytoplasmic helix itself
[Fig.
1(A,C)].
As
previously
described,
bacteria
expressing the different constructs were given an os-
motic shock in the presence of copper phenanthro-
line; this removes cellular reducing agents such as
glutathione while adding an oxidant. The treated
cells were pelleted, resuspended in sodium dodecyl
sulphate (SDS) loading buffer, and the MscL protein
visualized by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(PAGE) and western blot. Note that the protein is
trapped
in
its
native
membrane
environment
because no solubilization or protein handling is
involved before SDS PAGE. As shown in Figure 2
(left and center panels), SaMscL exists almost exclu-
sively as a pentamer regardless of the length of the
C-terminal truncation. Although a ladder of mono-
mer through pentamer can be observed for 10C/91C
D95 SaMscL in the no-shock/nontreated protein, in
the presence of an oxidizer the pentamer becomes
the prevalent band in a time dependant manner
(Fig. 2, right panel). Note that for the SaMscL single
cysteine mutants under the same treatment, no
other species than monomer was observed for M91C
but a small proportion of L10C existed as dimmers
(Supplemental information). Dimerization of L10C
was
expected
as
the
equivalent
mutant
from
EcoMscL, M12C, also form dimmers under similar
treatment.11 Finally, we show by patch clamp of
native membranes that both FL and D95 truncated
10C/91C SaMscL respond similarly to changes in the
redox potential of the bath (Fig. 3). In the presence
of the reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT), both
channels are functional and activity can be observed
in response to negative pressures applied to the
membrane patch (left traces). After perfusion with a
3% peroxide solution, channel activity could no lon-
ger be elicited even under high negative pressures
(right traces). These results are consistent with the
channels being locked closed after disulfide trapping,
suggesting that in native membranes the FL and
truncated channels are structural and functionally
similar. Hence, in vivo the C-terminal helical bundle
plays
no
detectable
role
in
proper
pentameric
assembly.
Many
previous
studies
have
concluded
that
MtMscL and EcoMscL are also pentamers. A study
using crosslinking, sedimentation equilibrium, and
size-exclusion chromatography showed EcoMscL as
a pentamer;12 another study using crosslinking and
electron microscopy reached the same conclusion.10
The crystal structure of MtMscL as well as the
recent OCAM analysis also showed a pentameric
structure for this ortholog.13 Finally, when studied
by using our in vivo disulfide trapping in native
membranes, all three MscL homologs have shown
pentameric stoichiometry (Supplementary Informa-
tion). Hence, there appears to be no variability in
the oligomeric state of these MscL orthologs.
Collectively, the data suggest that the C-termi-
nal domain of the SaMscL channel only plays a
Figure 2. Disulfide trapping experiments show that C-terminally truncated SaMscL protein exists as a pentamer in vivo.
Western blot analysis of WT SaMscL, double cysteine mutant 10C/91C SaMscL FL and with D95 truncation (left panel). All
samples were either nonshocked (NS) or shocked (Sþ) in the presence of the oxidizing agent copper phenanthroline. When
shocked in the presence of copper phenanthroline the majority of 10C/91C exists as a pentamer, independent of the length of
the C-terminal truncation (left and central panels). A ladder of monomer through pentamer is already present in the nonshock
sample; pentamer becomes the major band when osmotically downshocked in the presence of copper phenanthroline; this
occurs in a time-dependent manner (right panel). Note that no detergent solubilization before resuspension in Laemmli sample
buffer is performed in these experiments.
1640
PROTEINSCIENCE.ORG
Oligomeric State of MscL: A Pentamer

critical role in the oligomeric state of the protein
when it is solubilized in detergent. Different deter-
gents seem to have different abilities to alter MscL
oligomeric structure. It appears that LDAO is the
harshest detergent in this sense, leading to oligo-
meric rearrangement of the full-length SaMscL pro-
tein.9 DDM and perhaps other detergents can lead
to rearrangements of only the truncated, not FL,
SaMscL.13 However, there also appear to be species
differences; from the OCAM study, the FL EcoMscL
appears to form hexamers as well as pentamers
when solubilized in DDM. In addition, the same
study demonstrated that truncation of the MtMscL
did
not
destabilize
the
pentameric
organization
when solubilized in DDM.13 Hence, detergents alone
can cause specific protein complexes to rearrange
their oligomeric state while others appear stable. As
detergent solubilization is a critical and necessary
step to obtain membrane proteins for crystallization
and other biophysical and structural studies, where
possible, a complementary set of data assessing the
oligomeric state in vivo seems advisable.
Methods
Molecular biology
FL S. aureus MscL and the FL L10C/M91C S. aureus
MscL mutant were cloned into pET21a vector, which
has a His-tag at the c-terminal end. Truncated S. aur-
eus MscL mutants were produced by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) by adding stop codons at residues A96
(D95), A100 (D99), E104 (D103), and L108 (D107). Con-
structs were cloned into pet15b vector at NdeI/BamHI
and transformed into PB116s.14 All constructs from
the pet15b vector have a his-tag at the N-terminal.
In vivo disulfide trapping
Overnight cultures were diluted 1:100 and grown 1
h at 37C in Luria-Bertani (LB) media (410 mOs-
molar). LB with 1M NaCl was then added for a final
concentration of 0.5M. Cultures were then induced
with 1 mM isopropyl-beta-D-thiogalactopyranoside
(IPTG) for 1 h when an optical density (OD) 600 of
0.2 was reached. Cultures were either Mock shocked
(0.5M NaCl LB) or shocked (water with 1.5 lM cop-
per phenanthroline) at a 1:20 dilution for 15 min at
37C. Samples were spun down at 4000g for 20 min
and immediately resuspended in nonreducing sample
buffer, adjusted for final OD, and run on a 4–20% gel
(Bio-Rad) for western blot analysis.14 Note that in
less than 5 min, the samples are collected and loaded
on the gel. The primary antibody anti-Penta His (Qia-
gen) was used at 1:4000 and the secondary Goat anti-
Mouse horseradish peroxidase (HRP) (Bio-Rad) at
1:100,000. Blots were developed using HRP substrate
(Millipore) and exposed to film.
Electrophysiology
E. coli giant spheroplasts were generated and used
in
patch-clamp
experiments
as
described
previ-
ously.15 Excised, inside-out patches were examined
at room temperature under symmetrical conditions
using a buffer containing 200 mM KCl, 90 mM
MgCl2, 10 mM CaCl2, and 5 mM HEPES pH 6
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO). To study redox effects in
channel activity H2O2 1–3% v/v or DTT 1-10 mM
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were added to the bath. A pre-
vious study has demonstrated that this treatment has
no detrimental effect on channel function; in fact, one
cysteine mutant was shown to increase activity.16
Recordings were performed at 20 mV (positive pip-
ette). Data were acquired at a sampling rate of
20 kHz with a 5-kHz filter using an AxoPatch
200B amplifier in conjunction with Axoscope software
(Axon Instruments, Union City, CA). A piezoelectric
pressure transducer (World Precision Instruments, Sar-
asota, FL) was used to monitor the pressure throughout
the experiments. Data analysis was performed using
Clampfit9 from Pclamp9 (Axon Instruments).
References
1. Blount P, Sukharev SI, Moe PC, Schroeder MJ, Guy
HR, Kung C (1996) Membrane topology and multimeric
Figure 3. The FL and truncated SaMscL 10C/91C channels are functionally similar. The electrophysiological data shows
single-channel activities of both SaMscL 10C/91C FL and the truncated construct D95 SaMscL 10C/91C. Channel openings
are seen as upward deflections. Both channels respond equally to changes in the redox potential of the bath. In the presence
of the reducing agent DTT, the channels are functional and activity can be observed at the indicated pressures (left traces),
but after perfusing a peroxide solution in the bath, the channel activity is lost (right traces).
Iscla et al.
PROTEIN SCIENCE VOL 20:1638—1642
1641

structure of a mechanosensitive channel protein of
Escherichia coli. EMBO J 15:4798–4805.
2. Blount P, Iscla I, Moe PC, Li Y. MscL: the bacterial
mechanosensitive channel of large conductance. In:
Owen PH, Ed. (2007) Current topics in membranes.
Academic Press, San Diego, pp 201–233.
3. Chang G, Spencer RH, Lee AT, Barclay MT, Rees DC
(1998) Structure of the MscL homolog from Mycobacte-
rium tuberculosis: a gated mechanosensitive ion chan-
nel. Science 282:2220–2226.
4. Steinbacher S, Bass R, Strop P, Rees DC. Structures of
the prokaryotic mechanosensitive channels MscL and
MscS. In: Owen PH, Ed. (2007) Current topics in mem-
branes. Academic Press, San Diego, pp 1–24.
5. Liu Z, Gandhi CS, Rees DC (2009) Structure of a tetra-
meric MscL in an expanded intermediate state. Nature
461:120–124.
6. Pivetti CD, Yen MR, Miller S, Busch W, Tseng YH, Booth
IR, Saier MH (2003) Two families of mechanosensitive
channel proteins. Microbiol Mol Biol R 67:66–85.
7. Maurer J, Elmore D, Lester H, Dougherty D (2000)
Comparing and contrasting Escherichia coli and Myco-
bacterium
tuberculosis
mechanosensitive
channels
(MscL). New gain of function mutations in the loop
region. J Biol Chem 275:22238–22244.
8. Balleza D, Gomez-Lagunas F (2009) Conserved motifs
in mechanosensitive channels MscL and MscS. Eur
Biophys J 38:1013–1027.
9. Dorwart MR, Wray R, Brautigam CA, Jiang Y, Blount
P (2010) S. aureus MscL is a pentamer in vivo but
of variable stoichiometries in vitro: implications for
detergent-solubilized membrane proteins. PLoS Biol 8:
e1000555.
10. Yoshimura K, Usukura J, Sokabe M (2008) Gating-associ-
ated conformational changes in the mechanosensitive
channel MscL. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:4033–4038.
11. Iscla I, Wray R, Blount P (2008) On the structure of the
N-terminal domain of the MscL channel: helical bundle
or membrane interface. Biophys J 95:2283–2291.
12. Sukharev
SI,
Schroeder
MJ,
McCaslin
DR
(1999)
Stoichiometry
of
the
large
conductance
bacterial
mechanosensitive channel of E. coli. A biochemical
study. J Membr Biol 171:183–193.
13. Gandhi CS, Walton TA, Rees DC (2011) OCAM: a new
tool for studying the oligomeric diversity of MscL chan-
nels. Protein Sci 20:313–326.
14. Li Y, Wray R, Eaton C, Blount P (2009) An open-pore
structure
of
the
mechanosensitive
channel
MscL
derived by determining transmembrane domain inter-
actions upon gating. FASEB J 23:2197–2204.
15. Blount P, Moe PC (1999) Bacterial mechanosensitive
channels: integrating physiology, structure and func-
tion. Trends Microbiol 7:420–424.
16. Iscla I, Levin G, Wray R, Blount P (2007) Disulfide
trapping the mechanosensitive channel MscL into a
gating-transition state. Biophys J 92:1224–1232.
1642
PROTEINSCIENCE.ORG
Oligomeric State of MscL: A Pentamer
