ARTICLE
OPEN
Three-dimensional organotypic co-culture model of intestinal
epithelial cells and macrophages to study Salmonella enterica
colonization patterns
Jennifer Barrila1, Jiseon Yang1, Aurélie Crabbé
1,2, Shameema F. Sarker1, Yulong Liu1, C. Mark Ott3, Mayra A. Nelman-Gonzalez4,
Simon J. Clemett5, Seth D. Nydam1, Rebecca J. Forsyth1, Richard R. Davis1, Brian E. Crucian3, Heather Quiriarte6, Kenneth L. Roland1,
Karen Brenneman1, Clarence Sams3, Christine Loscher7 and Cheryl A. Nickerson1,8
Three-dimensional models of human intestinal epithelium mimic the differentiated form and function of parental tissues often not
exhibited by two-dimensional monolayers and respond to Salmonella in key ways that reﬂect in vivo infections. To further enhance
the physiological relevance of three-dimensional models to more closely approximate in vivo intestinal microenvironments
encountered by Salmonella, we developed and validated a novel three-dimensional co-culture infection model of colonic epithelial
cells and macrophages using the NASA Rotating Wall Vessel bioreactor. First, U937 cells were activated upon collagen-coated
scaffolds. HT-29 epithelial cells were then added and the three-dimensional model was cultured in the bioreactor until optimal
differentiation was reached, as assessed by immunohistochemical proﬁling and bead uptake assays. The new co-culture model
exhibited in vivo-like structural and phenotypic characteristics, including three-dimensional architecture, apical-basolateral polarity,
well-formed tight/adherens junctions, mucin, multiple epithelial cell types, and functional macrophages. Phagocytic activity of
macrophages was conﬁrmed by uptake of inert, bacteria-sized beads. Contribution of macrophages to infection was assessed by
colonization studies of Salmonella pathovars with different host adaptations and disease phenotypes (Typhimurium ST19 strain
SL1344 and ST313 strain D23580; Typhi Ty2). In addition, Salmonella were cultured aerobically or microaerobically, recapitulating
environments encountered prior to and during intestinal infection, respectively. All Salmonella strains exhibited decreased
colonization in co-culture (HT-29-U937) relative to epithelial (HT-29) models, indicating antimicrobial function of macrophages.
Interestingly, D23580 exhibited enhanced replication/survival in both models following invasion. Pathovar-speciﬁc differences in
colonization and intracellular co-localization patterns were observed. These ﬁndings emphasize the power of incorporating a series
of related three-dimensional models within a study to identify microenvironmental factors important for regulating infection.
npj Microgravity  (2017) 3:10 ; doi:10.1038/s41526-017-0011-2
INTRODUCTION
In vitro cell culture models comprised solely of either epithelial
cells or macrophages cultured as monolayers are often used to
study Salmonella enterica infections, as both cell types play critical
roles in the infection process.1, 2 Following ingestion, Salmonella
actively invade and replicate within intestinal epithelial cells and
are engulfed by macrophages upon crossing the epithelial barrier,
where they exploit phagocytes as a preferred niche for replication
and transport.3 While classic two-dimensional (2-D) monolayers
composed of a single cell type have provided important insight
into understanding the interactions between Salmonella and host
tissues during enteric infection, they lack the multicellular
complexity and three-dimensional (3-D) architecture that are
important for the differentiated structure and function of the
in vivo parental tissue.4–7 Synergism between epithelial cells and
macrophages is important for driving responses of both cell
types.5, 8, 9 Not surprisingly, monotypic (single cell type) cultures of
either epithelial cells or macrophages respond differently to
challenge with pathogens or their toxins as compared to co-
culture models containing both of these cell types, the latter of
which demonstrate a synergistic phenotype that better reﬂect the
in vivo response.5, 10 Indeed, it is widely recognized there is an
urgent need for advanced in vitro cell culture models that mimic
the complex 3-D architecture,
multicellular complexity and
phenotypic characteristics of in vivo tissues for use in predictive
human disease modeling, including infectious disease.4, 5, 11–13
Accordingly, achieving a deeper understanding of host–pathogen
interactions at the intestinal mucosa requires cell culture models
that incorporate 3-D architecture, differentiation and multicellular
complexity to characterize the interaction between epithelial cells
and macrophages during enteric infection.
The rotating wall vessel (RWV) bioreactor is a NASA biotechnol-
ogy that was designed to mimic aspects of the quiescent, low ﬂuid
shear culture environment found in microgravity in order to
Received: 30 September 2016 Revised: 23 November 2016 Accepted: 12 December 2016
1Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA; 2Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium; 3Biomedical Research and Environmental Sciences Division, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX, USA; 4Wyle Science, Technology and Engineering Group,
Houston, TX, USA; 5ERC, Inc/Jacobs JETS, Houston, TX, USA; 6JES Tech, Houston, TX, USA; 7Immunomodulation Research Group, School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University,
Glasnevin, Ireland and 8School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Correspondence: Cheryl A. Nickerson (Cheryl.Nickerson@asu.edu)
Jennifer Barrila and Jiseon Yang contributed equally to this work
www.nature.com/npjmgrav
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

facilitate the formation of 3-D tissue-like aggregates in the
laboratory.4, 14, 15 This low ﬂuid shear suspension culture system
has served as a powerful ground-based tool to enable the
establishment of highly differentiated 3-D cell cultures, including
both monotypic (originating from a single cell type) and co-
cultures (multiple cell types)4, 10 and has been used to establish
highly differentiated 3-D intestinal epithelial models to study
enteric infections.4, 7, 16–20 Our lab was ﬁrst to apply RWV-derived
3-D cell cultures to study bacterial host–pathogen interactions,
including 3-D intestinal epithelial models for Salmonella patho-
genesis,7, 17, 18 and 3-D lung epithelial models co-cultured with
macrophages for Pseudomonas aeruginosa pathogenesis.10 The
underlying concept of the RWV (Fig. 1) is to enable cell growth in
three dimensions, aggregation based on natural cellular afﬁnities
(facilitating co-culture of different cell types), and differentiation
into 3-D tissue-like assemblies.4 Cells are grown on porous
extracellular matrix (ECM)-coated microcarrier beads which serve
as scaffolds upon which they adhere, thereby allowing cells to
respond to chemical and molecular gradients in three dimensions
(apical, basal, and lateral) akin to the in vivo scenario. When the
RWV is completely ﬁlled with medium and rotation initiated, cells
are maintained in a physiological low ﬂuid shear suspension
culture environment with high mass transfer of nutrients and
waste, which is optimal for growth and differentiation.4, 21
We previously used the RWV to establish highly differentiated 3-
D intestinal organotypic models derived from human epithelial
cell lines and demonstrated their ability to predict in vivo infection
outcomes and Salmonella pathogenic mechanisms.7, 16–18 While
initiated
from
a
single
cell
type,
these
epithelial
models
spontaneously differentiated into multiple epithelial cell types
normally found in the intestine, including enterocytes, goblet cells,
Paneth cells, and M/M-like cells, while exhibiting extensive tight
junction formation, apical-basolateral polarity, and mucin produc-
tion. Following infection with Salmonella Typhimurium, these 3-D
epithelial models exhibited phenotypes consistent with in vivo
infections in animals and humans, including alterations in tissue
morphology, adherence, invasion, apoptosis, and production of
cytokines.7, 16–18 Moreover, S. Typhimurium invaded 3-D intestinal
cells independently of all known Salmonella type three secretion
systems, i.e. SPI-1, SPI-2, and the ﬂagellar secretory system,7 a
major ﬁnding that paralleled in vivo infection observations in both
animals and humans,22–27 and challenged the paradigm estab-
lished by 2-D monolayers that SPI-1 is always required for invasion
of intestinal epithelium. Similar results were recently reported
using a 3-D intestinal organoid model derived from human
induced pluripotent stem cells, which showed that a Typhimurium
invA mutant was still able to invade into the model, albeit at lower
levels than the wild type.6 Collectively, these ﬁndings demonstrate
the utility of 3-D tissue models in predicting in vivo-like
pathogenic mechanisms.
These results led us to postulate that our 3-D intestinal epithelial
model could serve as a high ﬁdelity platform for engineering an
improved version able to better recapitulate the multicellular complex-
ity normally encountered by Salmonella during enteric infection.
Fig. 1
Development strategy for 3-D co-culture model of human intestinal epithelium and macrophages. A Experimental design for 3-D co-
culture model development. HT-29 cells were initiated as adherent monolayers and U937 cells as suspension cultures. U937 cells (1 × 107)
were treated with PMA for 48 h in the presence of ECM-coated, porous microcarrier beads to allow attachment. Following treatment, PMA was
removed from the U937 cells. At the same time, HT-29 cells were trypsinized, counted and added (2 × 106) to the U937-bead mix. The RWV was
loaded with cultures, ﬁlled completely with media, and bubbles removed. Routine daily media changes began 4–5 days after initiation of
cultures. B Assay set-up for infection studies. 3-D aggregates were removed from the RWV, counted and evenly seeded into multi-well plates.
Light micrograph magniﬁcation = 100×. C Depiction of a single collagen-coated microcarrier bead (blue) covered with HT-29 cells (brown) and
U937 cells (red)
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
2
npj Microgravity (2017)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

We focused on the addition of macrophages, as they are a key
immune cell type targeted by Salmonella during infection, and
intracellular survival in these cells is essential for the virulence of
this pathogen.3, 28 While in vivo and in vitro studies have shown
that macrophages may contribute to Salmonella-host speciﬁcity
and are able to distinguish between the closely related pathovars
Typhimurium and Typhi, these studies have shown inconsistent
trends, likely due to differences in experimental design and
implementation.28–31 This area of study is of keen interest given
the devastating epidemic of invasive multidrug resistant non-
typhoidal Salmonella (iNTS) infections in sub-Saharan Africa linked
to a genetically distinct sequence type (ST) of S. Typhimurium,
ST313, which has undergone genome degradation similar to that
of host-adapted S. Typhi.32 S. Typhimurium is classiﬁed as a
generalist in terms of its host speciﬁcity, causing disease in a wide
range of hosts, including humans. While usually associated with
self-limiting gastroenteritis in humans, S. Typhimurium can cause
serious systemic infection in the immunocompromised. Conver-
sely, S. Typhi is a human-speciﬁc pathogen that causes systemic
illness and typhoid fever.3, 33 Thus, there is concern that ST313
may be evolving toward a human-speciﬁc adaptation similar to
Typhi. However, very limited information is available regarding
host-pathogen interaction characteristics and host speciﬁcity of
ST313, although recent studies using ST313 strain D23580 found
that it causes invasive disease in animals and lethal disease in
mice, indicating it is not a human-speciﬁc pathovar.34–36
Herein, we report advancement of our previously developed 3-
D HT-29 intestinal epithelial model7, 17 into a multicellular, co-
culture model that provides additional complexity relevant to the
intestinal microenvironment by incorporation of immune compe-
tent cells; speciﬁcally, functional macrophages. As 3-D intestinal
epithelial models have been repeatedly shown to better mimic
the differentiated structure/function of intestinal tissues, and
respond in a more in vivo-like manner to challenge with enteric
pathogens than 2-D monolayers, our comparisons in this study
thus focused on the 3-D co-culture and epithelial models.7, 17–19, 37
Morphological and immunohistochemical analysis of the HT-29-
U937 co-culture model revealed key in vivo-like structural and
functional characteristics. To assess the impact of macrophages in
this new co-culture model and validate its application as a human
surrogate infection platform, we applied it to characterize
infection proﬁles between closely related Salmonella enterica
pathovars with different disease phenotypes and host tropisms
(Typhimurium strains SL1344 and ST313 D23580, and Typhi strain
Ty2). To further enhance the physiological relevance of the study,
bacteria were cultured under aerobic or microaerobic conditions
prior to infection, as Salmonella must adapt to a broad range of
oxygen levels during its normal life cycle both before and after
entry into the host. This includes aerobic conditions prior to
ingestion, anaerobic conditions in the lumen, and microaerobic
conditions approaching the intestinal wall.38 Our studies revealed
that the 3-D co-culture model could discriminate between
Salmonella pathovars and represents an innovative model for
Fig. 2
3-D co-culture model validation. A Adherens and tight junction markers β-catenin (a, f) and ZO-1 (b, g); mucin markers MUC5AC (c, h)
and MUC2 (d, i); and M cell marker Sialyl Lewis A (e, j) shown in green. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue; c–e and h–j). B U937
macrophages within the 3-D co-culture model. Antibodies used to label macrophages shown in green: a anti-CD45, b anti-CD68, and c anti-
CD84. Cell nuclei stained with DAPI (blue). d Internalization of bacteria-sized ﬂuorescent beads by phagocytic U937 macrophages. The 3-D
epithelial model was used as a negative control (Supplementary Fig. S1). Magniﬁcation = 400×. Arrowheads are guides for select markers
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
3
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)

host-speciﬁc testing that can bridge knowledge gaps between 3-D
epithelial models and in vivo studies to study host-pathogen
interactions and unveil infectious disease mechanisms.
To our knowledge, this work represents the ﬁrst RWV-derived 3-
D co-culture model of intestinal epithelium and macrophages. This
study is an important step forward in developing a 3-D intestinal
epithelial co-culture model that integrates immune cells to mimic
the multicellular complexity of the parental tissue and its
application to understand the synergistic contribution of different
cell types to enteric host-pathogen interactions.
RESULTS
Development of a novel 3-D co-culture model
Our previous 3-D model of HT-29 colonic epithelial cells7, 16, 17 was
advanced in this study by the inclusion of U937 monocytes that
were pre-differentiated into macrophages by PMA (Figs. 1–2). The
microcarrier bead scaffolds used for culturing 3-D cells resulted in
establishment of an “inside-out” intestinal model, wherein the
luminal side of the cells faces the culture media, which facilitates
access of Salmonella to the host-pathogen interface naturally
encountered during intestinal infection. Cells are attached to ECM-
coated porous beads through their basal surface and are in
contact with the external milieu at their apical surface, which is
relevant to the architecture of the parental tissue. In order to
develop the novel 3-D co-culture model, we had to design and
optimize several experimental parameters including order of
addition and ratio of the two cell types (HT-29 and U937) and the
activation state of U937 cells upon addition to the model. We
found that the addition of U937 cells to a partially or fully
established 3-D epithelial model did not result in adequate
incorporation of the U937 cells into the model, nor did it allow for
the U937 cells to be incorporated beneath or within the
epithelium, as would be relevant to the in vivo scenario. In
addition, although we previously found that the addition of U937
monocytes to a 3-D alveolar epithelial lung model naturally
stimulated their activation into functional macrophages,10 we did
not ﬁnd this to be the case when these same cells were added to
our 3-D colon model in our current study. Thus, we decided to pre-
bind the U937 cells to the collagen I-coated microcarrier beads
and activate using PMA. Following PMA removal, the cell-bead
complexes were introduced into the RWV bioreactor together with
the HT-29 cells. Using this optimized procedure, we found that
immunoﬂuorescence proﬁling revealed the presence of differ-
entiated intestinal epithelial cells as well as macrophages, the
latter of which were integrated both between epithelial cells and
underneath the epithelium (Fig. 2). We then attempted to
enumerate the ratio of epithelial cells to macrophages within
the ﬁnal model; however, we were unable to successfully remove
U937 cells from the microcarrier beads using either trypsin,
collagenase or a combination of the two enzymes.
Validation of newly developed 3-D co-culture model
Distribution of markers normally expressed by intestinal epithe-
lium was proﬁled using confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM). Adherens and tight junctional markers β-catenin and
ZO-1, respectively, were found localized at contact zones between
adjacent cells in both the 3-D co-culture and epithelial models
(Fig. 2A, panels a, b, f and g). Mucins (MUC5AC, MUC2) and Sialyl
Lewis A antigen (M-cell marker) were expressed in the 3-D co-
culture model and showed a similar expression pattern as
compared to the epithelial model (Fig. 2A, panels c–e and h–j).
Secretion of mucins indicates the presence of goblet cells, while
expression of Sialyl Lewis A demonstrates potential presence of M
cells. As with the 3-D epithelial model,7, 17 these ﬁndings indicate
the presence of various differentiated intestinal epithelial cell
types in the 3-D co-culture model.
U937 cells were identiﬁed using well-deﬁned markers expressed
by macrophages including CD45, CD68 and CD84.9, 39–41 Each of
these markers was expressed exclusively in the 3-D co-cultures
(Fig. 2B) but not in the epithelial model (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Macrophages were found integrated among the epithelium of the
3-D co-culture model and were observed in the models through at
least 16 days of culture (Fig. 2B). The phagocytic activity of
macrophages was assessed by proﬁling the uptake of inert,
bacteria-sized (2 µm) ﬂuorescent beads. The 3-D co-culture, but
not the epithelial model, contained cells with high concentrations
of internalized ﬂuorescent beads (Fig. 2B, panel d; Supplementary
Fig. S1, panel d), indicating phagocytic activity by macrophages in
3-D co-culture.
Application of 3-D co-culture model to study host-pathogen
colonization by Salmonella pathovars
The contribution of macrophages to Salmonella infection was
analyzed using a gentamicin protection assay to compare
colonization proﬁles (adherence, invasion and intracellular survi-
val) between Typhimurium strains SL1344 and D23580, and Typhi
strain Ty2 in the 3-D co-culture and epithelial models. Bacteria
were cultured under both aerobic and microaerobic conditions
prior to infection (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. S2). All Salmonella
strains were recovered at signiﬁcantly lower numbers in the
Fig. 3
Salmonella pathovars colonize 3-D co-culture model at lower levels than 3-D epithelial model. Bacteria were cultured under
microaerobic conditions. Triplicate wells of either the co-culture (white bars) or epithelial model (black bars) were infected at an MOI of ~10:1.
Following infection, host cells were incubated for either A 30 min (adherence), B 3 h (invasion), or C 24 h (intracellular survival). For each time
point serial dilutions of the host cell lysate were plated to assess CFU/mL. All data were normalized to the initial bacterial inoculum for each
strain. Error bars represent the standard deviation from two biological replicates, each conducted in technical triplicate. Statistically signiﬁcant
differences for each strain between the co-culture and epithelial models are indicated as (*) p < 0.05; (**) p < 0.01; or (***) p < 0.001
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
4
npj Microgravity (2017)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

co-culture model containing functional macrophages relative to
the epithelial model for all colonization time points. Decreased
colonization of the 3-D co-culture model was observed regardless
of the oxygen condition under which the bacteria were cultured
(Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. S2).
Model-speciﬁc differences in adherence proﬁles of Typhimurium
vs. Typhi
We observed distinct patterns in the adherence of S. Typhi strain
Ty2 relative to the two NTS strains (SL1344 and D23580). Ty2
adhered to the 3-D epithelial model at greater levels than either of
the NTS strains (Fig. 3A and Supplementary Fig. S3A). This
difference was completely abrogated in the 3-D co-culture model
containing functional macrophages, as all strains displayed
decreased adherence with no statistical differences observed
(Fig. 3A and Supplementary Fig. S3A). Although all strains adhered
to the 3-D co-culture model at lower levels than the epithelial
model, there was a signiﬁcantly larger reduction in the adherence
of Ty2 compared to the NTS strains (Supplementary Fig. S3B).
Regardless of oxygen conditions, Ty2 displayed an ~8-fold
reduction in adherence to the co-culture model relative to the
epithelial model, while NTS strains only displayed a 3 to 4-fold
reduction in adherence. The large decreases in Salmonella
adherence to the 3-D co-culture model could potentially be due
to changes in the expression and/or localization of surface
receptors in the host that occurred with the inclusion of activated
macrophages with the epithelial cells. Previous studies have
shown that the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR) is an important receptor for Typhi42, 43 and has
also been found to internalize within colonic crypt epithelial cells
in a mouse model of Typhimurium-induced enteritis.44 However,
immunohistochemical proﬁling of our uninfected 3-D epithelial
and co-culture models revealed no differences in the localization
or expression of CFTR that would explain these differences in
adherence (data not shown).
Oxygen-speciﬁc differences in invasion and replication/survival
proﬁles of Salmonella pathovars
When analyzed as a percentage of the number of bacteria that
adhered, we found that microaerobically grown Salmonella
exhibited different invasion proﬁles in the 3-D co-culture as
compared to the epithelial model (Figs. 4–5). Figure 4 shows
statistical comparisons for each strain between oxygen conditions.
Microaerobic culture decreased invasiveness of SL1344 and Ty2 in
the epithelial model, while no differences were observed for
D23580 between the two oxygen conditions. Conversely, in the
3-D co-culture model, SL1344 and Ty2 displayed no oxygen-
related trends, while microaerobic culture enhanced the invasion
of D23580. These data indicate that the multicellular complexity of
the host model used to proﬁle oxygen-dependent invasion
properties is an important factor. We also found that D23580
displayed distinct colonization patterns relative to SL1344 and Ty2
(Fig. 5). Although D23580 and SL1344 adhered to both the 3-D
Fig. 4
Microaerobic culture enhances the invasiveness of adherent
D23580 in the 3-D co-culture model. SL1344 (gray bars), D23580
(black bars) and Ty2 (white bars) were cultured under either aerobic
conditions (black border) or microaerobic conditions (red border) and
used to infect the 3-D epithelial or 3-D co-culture model. All data for
each strain were normalized to the number of bacteria that adhered.
Statistically signiﬁcant differences for each strain between oxygen
conditions are indicated as (*) p < 0.05 or (***) p < 0.001. Error bars
represent standard deviation from two biological replicates, each
conducted in technical triplicate
Fig. 5
D23580 displays enhanced intracellular survival relative to SL1344 and Ty2 following invasion in the 3-D co-culture model. A Percent
invasion relative to number of adhered bacteria. B Percent replication/survival relative to number of invaded bacteria. Following invasion,
D23580 (black bars) replicated/survived better than both SL1344 (gray bars) and Ty2 (white bars) (data normalized to the number of invaded
bacteria). Bacteria were cultured under microaerobic or aerobic conditions. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between strains are indicated
as: (*) p < 0.05 or (***) p < 0.001. Error bars represent the standard deviation from two biological replicates, each conducted in technical
triplicate
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
5
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)

co-culture and epithelial models at similar levels (Supplementary
Fig. S2A), D23580 invaded both models at signiﬁcantly lower
levels (>4-fold) than SL1344 relative to the number of adhered
bacteria (Fig. 5A). However, D23580 replicated/survived at higher
levels in both 3-D models than either SL1344 or Ty2 following
invasion (Fig. 5B and Supplementary Fig. S4). This occurred when
the bacteria were cultured under either oxygen condition, with
the aerobically cultured D23580 replicating/surviving approxi-
mately 2.1-fold higher than microaerobically cultured bacteria in
the 3-D co-culture model (Fig. 5B, p < 0.05). No difference between
the two oxygen conditions was observed in the replication/
survival of D23580 in the 3-D epithelial model (Supplementary
Fig. S4).
Immunohistochemical proﬁling of 3-D models following infection
We performed immunohistochemical proﬁling at 24 h post-
infection (h.p.i.) to characterize the distribution/co-localization
patterns of the different Salmonella pathovars within the 3-D co-
culture and epithelial models (Figs. 6–8; Supplementary Figs. S5–
S6). In both of the 3-D models infected with SL1344, bacteria were
often observed to co-localize with host cells as dense intracellular
clusters (Fig. 6A, panel a; Supplementary Fig. S5). When the 3-D co-
culture
model
was
infected
by
SL1344
grown
aerobically,
macrophages were rarely observed and bacteria were found
predominantly in epithelial cells (Fig. 6A, panel a). In contrast,
when SL1344 was grown microaerobically, a greater number of
macrophages were present (Fig. 6A, panel d, insets); however,
while some macrophages were found to contain internalized
bacteria (Fig. 6A, panel d, right inset and Fig. 6B, panel b), most
were empty (Fig. 6A, panel d, left inset and Fig. 6B, panel a), with
the majority of SL1344 associated with epithelial cells.
In contrast to SL1344 infection, macrophages were readily
found when D23580 was grown aerobically, with bacteria
associating with both epithelial cells and macrophages in 3-D
co-culture (Fig. 6A, panel b). However, when D23580 was grown
microaerobically, it was rarely found in macrophages (Fig. 6A,
panel e, inset). Within D23580-infected cells, the bacterial load per
cell (in either macrophages or epithelial cells) appeared much
lower when compared to those infected with SL1344, with
bacteria forming a predominantly punctate pattern with occa-
sional intracellular clustering (Fig. 6A, panels b and e; Supple-
mentary Fig. S5).
In line with the colonization data, the total number of host cells
(regardless of host cell type) infected with Ty2 appeared to be
much lower in both 3-D models relative to SL1344 and D23580.
When infected cells were found, they were often completely ﬁlled
with bacteria (Fig. 6A, panels c and f; Fig. 7). In the 3-D co-culture
model, we observed that when Ty2 was grown aerobically, it
localized predominantly to epithelial cells, with the majority of
macrophages empty. In the rare event that Ty2 co-localized with
macrophages, these cells were almost always completely ﬁlled
with bacteria, forming ‘giant macrophages’ (Fig. 6A, panel c, inset).
In contrast, we did not ﬁnd any Ty2-infected macrophages when
the bacteria were grown microaerobically (Fig. 6A, panel f, inset).
Instead, Ty2 formed large clusters within epithelial cells (Fig. 6A,
panel f; Fig. 7).
We also examined mucus production following infection. We
observed enhanced expression of MUC5AC following infection in
both 3-D models relative to uninfected controls (Fig. 8 and
Supplementary Fig. S7), although no clear differences in mucus
production between individual pathovars was observed.
DISCUSSION
An improved understanding of the transition between normal
intestinal homeostasis and disease caused by enteric pathogens
will be facilitated by development of organotypic intestinal cell
culture models that mimic the 3-D architecture and multicellular
complexity present in the parental tissue in vivo. In this study, we
advanced our previously characterized 3-D model of human
colonic epithelium7, 16, 17 towards a more immunocompetent 3-D
model through the co-culture of HT-29 cells and phagocytic U937
macrophages using the RWV bioreactor. To our knowledge, this
model represents the ﬁrst RWV-derived 3-D co-culture model
comprised of intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages.
The
newly
developed
3-D
co-culture
model
shares
key
characteristics with the 3-D epithelial model from which it was
derived,17 including apical-basolateral polarity, well-organized
tight junctions, expression of mucins, and evidence of multiple
epithelial cell types present in vivo, including goblet cells and M-
cells (Fig. 2A). The key advancement made in this work was the
incorporation of phagocytic macrophages into the epithelial
model in order to more closely approximate in vivo multicellular
complexity, architecture and function. This is an important feature,
as the gastrointestinal mucosa contains the largest population of
tissue macrophages in the body, which play a critical role in
protecting the host from pathogens, including Salmonella.45, 46 A
previous study reported the incorporation of lymphocytes into a
3-D RWV intestinal epithelial model for enteric infection; however
macrophages were not included in the model.47
When we applied both our 3-D co-culture and epithelial models
to evaluate the colonization proﬁles of distinct Salmonella
pathovars, we found that the presence of macrophages in the
3-D co-culture model had an inhibitory effect on the adherence,
invasion and survival of all strains evaluated relative to the
epithelial model, which contained epithelial cells only (Fig. 3). This
inhibition could be due to an overall increased resistance to
colonization as a result of cross talk between the epithelial cells
and the macrophages or increased killing of the bacteria by the
macrophages and/or epithelial cells. In either scenario, these
ﬁndings are in alignment with the known role of macrophages
in vivo to protect the host against enteric pathogens45, 48 and
further emphasize the important role of immune cells in the early
interactions between the pathogen and host.
We also found that Typhi adhered to the 3-D epithelial model at
much higher levels than the Typhimurium strains (Fig. 3A and
Supplementary Fig. S3). This enhanced adherence was eliminated
when the same strains were used to infect the 3-D co-culture
model (epithelial cells plus macrophages), with the Ty2 adherence
signiﬁcantly more impacted by the presence of macrophages in
the co-culture model than NTS strains D23580 and SL1344
(Supplementary Fig. S3, panel B). Previous monolayer studies
using a single host cell type (epithelial cells or macrophages) have
produced conﬂicting results regarding the differences in coloniza-
tion
between Typhi
and Typhimurium,
with some
studies
reporting that Typhimurium adheres and invades at higher levels
than Typhi and others ﬁnding the precise opposite.33,
49–51
Genomic comparisons between Typhi and Typhimurium have
revealed discrete differences between the two serovars in genes
known to be important for bacterial adherence, including ﬁmbrial
and Vi capsule genes (the latter speciﬁc to Typhi).52–57 While some
studies have characterized the phenotypic impact of those
differences,58–61 the adherence and invasion mechanisms of
Typhi are still not fully understood, due in part to the limits of
the current experimental models for human-speciﬁc infectious
diseases. The expression, localization and conformation of surface
structures present on both the host and pathogen play important
roles in initiating infection.62, 63 It is well established that the
expression and localization of a variety of surface markers can be
altered when cells are cultured in 3-D relative to their 2-D
counterparts, with the former condition often closely reﬂecting
the in vivo-scenario.4, 10, 12, 64, 65 Moreover, it has been previously
shown in both 3-D10 and 2-D66 cultures that the co-culture of
epithelial cells and macrophages can lead to alterations in the
expression of cell surface proteins. Thus the large decrease we
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
6
npj Microgravity (2017)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

observed in Salmonella adherence to the 3-D co-culture model
could potentially be due to changes in the expression and/or
localization of surface receptors in the host that occurred with the
inclusion of macrophages with the epithelial cells. It was shown
previously that CFTR is an important receptor for Typhi.42, 43 We
hypothesized that the inclusion of activated macrophages in the
3-D co-culture model could lead to altered localization and/or
expression of the CFTR receptor in a manner that could explain
the drastic decrease in Typhi adherence between the epithelial
and co-culture models relative to the Typhimurium serovars.
However, under the conditions of this study we observed no
differences by immunohistochemical proﬁling in its localization or
expression between the two models. Another alterative explana-
tion is that the Typhi strain was killed at higher levels than the NTS
strains by the either the macrophages, the epithelial cells, or both.
Studies
are
ongoing
in
our
laboratory
to
investigate
the
mechanistic basis for these differences.
We were particularly interested in applying our 3-D organoid
models to study the colonization characteristics of ST313 strain
D23580 relative to the ‘classic’ Typhimurium and Typhi strains
SL1344 and Ty2, respectively. D23580, a representative ST313
clinical isolate, has undergone genome reduction similar to that of
other human-restricted serovars like Typhi.32 ST313 strains are
often referred to as ‘highly invasive’, as they are predominantly
recovered from the bloodstream of patients.32,
35,
50,
67,
68
However, results from research into the invasiveness and survival
of ST313 relative to classic Salmonella strains using in vitro models
have been somewhat contradictory.36, 50, 69, 70 Animal studies by
our lab and others have indicated that gastrointestinal coloniza-
tion by ST313 (including D23580) is low, with rapid spread to
systemic tissues.34, 35 In our current study, we found that D23580
invaded both the 3-D co-culture and epithelial models at
signiﬁcantly lower levels than SL1344 (Fig. 3B). When we
evaluated the survival of each strain relative to the number of
invaded bacteria, D23580 replicated/survived better than either
SL1344 or Ty2 in both of the 3-D models (Fig. 5B). These ﬁndings
suggest that D23580 may spread more efﬁciently throughout the
infected host relative to classic Typhimurium due to its inherent
intracellular survival properties rather than an ability to invade at
higher levels. Additional possibilities to explain the enhanced
Fig. 6
Different co-localization patterns of Salmonella pathovars in the 3-D co-culture model. A Cells were ﬁxed 24 h.p.i. with SL1344 (a, d),
D23580 (b, e) or Ty2 (c, f) that were cultured aerobically (a–c) or microaerobically (d–f). Time-matched uninfected control is shown in
(Supplementary Fig. S6). Samples co-stained with CD45 antibody (macrophages, yellow) and anti-Salmonella antibody (green, appears white
when overlaid with CD45 signal). Cell nuclei stained with DAPI (blue). Insets highlight representative co-localization patterns for bacteria and
macrophages. When SL1344 was grown microaerobically, macrophages were either empty (d, left inset) or contained internalized bacteria (d,
right inset). When D23580 and Ty2 were grown microaerobically, the majority of the macrophages were empty (insets). Magniﬁcation = 400×.
Scale bar = 10 µm. B 3-D perspective of (d) insets showing a empty macrophages and b SL1344-containing macrophages. Image generated in
ParaView
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
7
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)

recovery of D23580 at 24 h include, (1) heterogenous populations
of intracellular bacteria that are in different physiological states
(including viable but not culturable organisms, or populations
where the majority of bacteria have reached stationary phase),
and (2) host cells that have been lysed by infection, thereby
precluding the recovery of released bacteria during plating for
viable cfu in gentamicin assays.
The 3-D co-culture and epithelial models could also distinguish
between the Salmonella pathovars grown under limited oxygen.
As facultative anaerobes, salmonellae encounter and respond to a
wide range of oxygen levels both in the environment and in vivo.
Studies have reported that limiting oxygen conditions increase the
adherence and invasiveness of Salmonella when used to infect
pure monolayer cultures of either epithelial cells or macro-
phages.71–73 We did not ﬁnd that low oxygen increased the
adherence or invasiveness of any of the strains tested using either
of our highly differentiated 3-D cell culture models when data
were normalized to the initial inoculum, although Typhi did
display an upward trend in adherence in the 3-D epithelial model
following microaerobic culture (p = 0.07, Supplementary Fig. S3C).
When invasion data were analyzed relative to the number of
bacteria that had adhered, we found microaerobic culture
decreased invasiveness of SL1344 and Ty2, yet had no effect on
ST313 strain D23580 in the epithelial model (Fig. 4). However, in
the co-culture model a different trend was observed: SL1344 and
Ty2 displayed no oxygen-related differences in invasion, while
microaerobic culture enhanced invasion of D23580 that had
adhered to the model. The enhanced invasive capabilities of
D23580 pre-adapted to low oxygen was not observed in the 3-D
epithelial model (the more reductionist model; Fig. 4), nor was it
observed when the data were analyzed as a percentage of the
initial inoculum. These results suggest that although low oxygen
may not increase the ability for D23580 to adhere to the host, the
bacteria that are able attach are able to invade or be taken up at
higher levels than when they are pre-adapted to higher oxygen
conditions. Moreover, this enhanced invasion/uptake was only
observed in the 3-D co-culture model, indicating that the
macrophages play a key role in this increased invasion phenotype
either directly through increased uptake of D23580 or indirectly
through cross talk to the epithelium. Intriguingly, although
microaerobic culture enhanced the invasiveness of D23580 that
had adhered, it did not enhance the survival of those that invaded
as much as when the bacteria were cultured aerobically (Fig. 5B).
This difference was not observed in the 3-D epithelial model for
D23580 grown under the two oxygen conditions (Supplementary
Fig. S4).
One advantage of using a multicellular in vitro host model
system is the ability to visualize the co-localization patterns of
each strain relative to the different host cell types. We found that
each of the Salmonella pathovars displayed distinct patterns in
their clustering and host cell speciﬁcity (Fig. 6). Regardless of the
model being infected (3-D co-culture or epithelial), SL1344-
infected
cells
were
abundant
in
samples
imaged
at
the
intracellular survival/replication time point (24 h.p.i.), with the
bacteria forming dense intracellular clusters within infected cells.
D23580 formed more punctate patterns with occasional intracel-
lular clustering and what appeared to be lower numbers of
bacteria relative to SL1344- or Ty2-infected models. Although Ty2-
infected cells were more difﬁcult to ﬁnd relative to SL1344 and
D23580, when infected cells were found (epithelial cells or
macrophages), they were completely packed full of bacteria.
These distinct phenotypes observed may be related, in part, to
differences
in
the
survival
and/or
dissemination
strategies
between the three strains. During S. enterica infections, bacteria
grow within cells and are subsequently re-distributed among
nearby uninfected cells in order to form new infection foci that
become pathological lesions.74–77 There is a heterogeneous
expansion within tissues, with most phagocytes displaying low
bacterial numbers and small number heavily infected.74, 76–78 It
has been previously shown in mice that Salmonella strains
defective in SPI-2 are still able to grow to high intracellular
densities, but have difﬁculty exiting the cells and re-distributing
within tissues, leading to a lower net growth within organs and
higher bacterial loads for the small numbers of infected cells.78
This phenotype resembles what we observed with Typhi in our
human 3-D organotypic models. Several SPI-2 effectors present in
Fig. 7
3-D perspective of intracellular Salmonella in epithelial cells. The co-culture model was ﬁxed 24 h.p.i. with SL1344, D23580, or Ty2 grown
microaerobically, stained with anti-Salmonella antibody (green) and DAPI (blue, nuclei), and imaged with CLSM (Magniﬁcation = 400×). Images
were rendered as a 3-D perspective surface using an isovolume ﬁlter with ParaView (see Experimental Procedures). A Oblique view, B Axial
view showing a cut-away slice, C digitally cropped image from (B) highlighting infected epithelial cells
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
8
npj Microgravity (2017)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

Typhimurium are missing (sseI, gogB, spvB, spvC, sseK1, sseK2, and
sseK3) or inactivated (sopD2 and sseJ) in Typhi.52–54, 79, 80 These
differences
may
lead
to
different
dissemination
strategies
between the serovars in human tissues; an intriguing prospect
that will be investigated using these models in future studies.
We also observed that the oxygen condition under which the
bacteria had been cultured prior to the start of the infection
altered the host cell co-localization distribution pattern between
epithelial cells and macrophages (Fig. 6 and Supplementary
Fig. S5). When SL1344 was cultured aerobically, it was very difﬁcult
to locate any macrophages in the co-culture model at 24 h.p.i.,
suggesting that SL1344 may have induced apoptosis in these cells;
a phenotype previously observed in SL1344-infected macro-
phages.30,
50,
70,
81 In contrast, macrophages were found in
D23580- and Ty2-infected models, with both strains co-localizing
with intestinal epithelial cells and macrophages when the bacteria
were cultured aerobically. These ﬁndings are in agreement with
reports showing that SL1344 induces higher levels of apoptosis in
macrophages than Typhi30, 70, 81 and ST313 strains50, 70 when
cultured under aerobic conditions. Interestingly, when SL1344 was
cultured under low oxygen conditions, macrophages were readily
found within the model, some of which contained bacteria while
others were empty (Fig. 6A, panel d). Likewise, we found more
empty macrophages in the model when D23580 and Ty2 were
cultured microaerobically (Fig. 6A, panels e and f). Possible
explanations for these infection patterns following culture of the
bacteria under low oxygen conditions prior to infection include:
(1) pathogen avoidance of macrophages, (2) speciﬁc targeting of
epithelial cells, (3) enhanced intracellular killing within macro-
phages, and/or (4) a masking effect whereby the macrophages are
unable to detect the pathogen, leading to lower levels of uptake.
When we compared our co-culture imaging results at 24 h to the
co-culture colonization data at the same time point (Fig. 5B), both
SL1344 and D23580 displayed an ~2-fold decrease (p < 0.05) in
replication/survival when the bacteria were cultured under
oxygen-limiting conditions relative to aerobic cultures. However,
Ty2 displayed no signiﬁcant differences in replication/survival
between the two oxygen conditions (Fig. 5). Future studies will
focus on further investigating the mechanisms underlying these
differences.
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, the 3-D co-culture model of human colonic epithelium
in combination with immune cells that was engineered, validated
and tested in this study represents a new tool to investigate
mechanisms underlying enteric diseases with both non-infectious
and
infectious etiologies,
including
salmonellosis.
Phagocytic
macrophages were incorporated in the model in order to better
recapitulate the multicellular complexity and structure of the
parental tissue, thereby allowing for synergistic contributions of
different cell types during infection to be assessed so that host-
pathogen interactions can be studied in a more physiologically
relevant context. In addition, we also demonstrated that this model
could be used for investigations into the impact of different
environmental parameters on colonization as well as co-localization
patterns of pathogens with different host cell types. These ﬁndings
emphasize the power of incorporating a series of related models
with increasing complexity to study infectious disease mechanisms.
Using this approach, we identiﬁed key microenvironmental factors
(i.e., host multicellular complexity and oxygen) important for
regulating pathovar-speciﬁc invasion and host co-localization
properties. We continue to enhance the physiological relevance
of these models by incorporation of additional cell types that are
normally found in the tissue in vivo, including the use of primary
cells, dendritic cells, B cells and T cells, which will continue to
advance our mechanistic understanding of enteric infectious
disease in the context of the host-microenvironment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains and growth conditions
Salmonella Typhimurium SL1344 and D23580, S. Typhi Ty2, and E. coli
HB101 were used in this study. Bacterial cultures were initiated under
Fig. 8
MUC5AC production by the 3-D co-culture and 3-D epithelial models following infection with Salmonella pathovars cultured under
microaerobic conditions. The 3-D co-culture model (a–d) and 3-D epithelial model (e–h) were ﬁxed 24 h.p.i. with either SL1344 (a, e), D23580
(b, f) or Ty2 (c, g) that had been cultured under microaerobic conditions. Time-matched uninfected controls are shown (d, h). Cultures were
co-stained with a MUC5AC antibody (yellow), an anti-Salmonella antibody (green), and the cell nuclei stained with DAPI (blue). Magniﬁcation =
400×
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
9
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)

aerobic conditions in Lennox broth (LB) overnight with aeration (180 rpm)
at 37
°C. Overnight cultures were diluted 1:200 into fresh LB. For
microaerobic studies, LB media was pre-ﬂushed with a mixed gas
comprised of 2% O2, 6% CO2, and 92% N2 and inoculations took place
within a Coy chamber which was maintained using the same gas mixture.
Oxygen levels in the chamber were monitored by an O2 sensor and
remained between 2.1–2.4% for the duration of the culture. Both aerobic
and microaerobic cultures were grown at 37 °C and 180 rpm to late log
phase, and immediately thereafter used for infection assays. To conﬁrm
bacterial strains were at the same phase of growth, growth curves were
performed under both aerobic and microaerobic conditions by plating for
viable colony-forming units per mL (CFU/mL) and measuring the
corresponding OD600 (data not shown).
Human cell lines and culture conditions
The human colonic adenocarcinoma cell line HT-29 and the human
monocytic cell line U93782 were obtained from ATCC (HTB-38 and CRL-
1593.2, respectively). These cell lines were chosen for this study as both
represent model cell types commonly used to study Salmonella-host
interactions,
and
thus
there
is
extensive
published
literature
for
comparison. Moreover, U937 cells are well suited for this study, as they
can be differentiated into adherent phagocytic cells that exhibit many key
morphological and functional properties of macrophages, including
phagocytosis. GTSF-2 medium (Hyclone) supplemented with 10% heat-
inactivated FBS (Life Technologies), 2.5 mg/L ITS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 2.25
g/L sodium bicarbonate was used for all studies, and cells were maintained
at 37 °C, 10% CO2. HT-29 cells were initiated as monolayers and U937 cells
as a suspension culture, the latter of which was maintained at the
recommended cell density of 2 × 105–2 × 106 cells/mL. U937 cells (1 × 107)
were added to 0.25 g porous Cytodex-3 microcarrier beads (Sigma-Aldrich)
that had been prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA; Sigma-Aldrich) (10−8 M) was added
to GTSF-2 to induce characteristics of terminally differentiated macro-
phages.83 The mix was evenly distributed into 6-well plates and incubated
for 48 h at 37 °C, 10% CO2. Following incubation, PMA-differentiated U937
cells bound to microcarrier beads were gently rinsed with GTSF-2 media
and combined with HT-29 cells (2 × 106). Cultures were loaded into the
RWV, which was then ﬁlled completely with culture media, and bubbles
removed. Cultures were incubated statically for 15–30 min. prior to
initiating rotation (20 rpm), monitored daily and small bubbles removed
if observed. GTSF-2 was replenished after the ﬁrst 4–5 days and then every
24 h thereafter until the harvest of cultures at 15–16 days. The 3-D HT-29
epithelial cultures17 served as controls and were grown in parallel with the
3-D co-culture model for all studies.
Bead uptake assays
The phagocytic activity of macrophages was assessed as previously
described,10, 84 based on uptake of bacteria-sized (2 µM) Fluoresbrite YG
Microspheres (Polysciences). Brieﬂy, 3-D aggregates (2 × 106 cells) of either
the co-culture or epithelial model were incubated with 108 ﬂuorescent
beads for 30 min at 37 °C and 10% CO2 in 6-well plates (5 mL medium).
Following incubation, the aggregates were rinsed in triplicate with cold
Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS; Invitrogen) to remove non-
phagocytosed beads and ﬁxed using 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA).
Following a 30-minute incubation, aggregates were rinsed in triplicate
with DPBS and further processed for imaging with CLSM as described
below.
Infection studies
Upon reaching optimal differentiation as determined by immunohisto-
chemical proﬁling, 3-D cell culture models were harvested from the RWV,
assayed for viability, and seeded into multi-well plates to a ﬁnal density of
~1 × 106 cells/well. A gentamicin protection assay was then performed as
described previously.7, 17 Brieﬂy, bacteria were added at a multiplicity of
infection (MOI) of approximately 10. Samples were plated for viable CFU/
mL for adherence (30 min), invasion (3 h) and intracellular survival (24 h).
For each time point, host cells were washed 2–3 times with HBSS, lysed
with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, and serial dilutions of the lysate plated on
LB agar to assess CFU per mL. Gentamicin was added after the 30-min (50
µg/mL) and 3 h (10 µg/mL) time points in order to eliminate remaining
extracellular bacteria. Percent adherence was calculated by normalizing
the CFU/mL obtained at 30 min to the initial bacterial inoculum for each
strain. Percent invasion and survival/replication were calculated as
indicated in the ﬁgure legend, either by normalizing to the initial bacterial
inoculum or to the total CFU obtained for the previous time point. All
statistical comparisons were made in Graphpad using the Student’s t-test
(p < 0.05). Two independent biological trials were performed for each
experiment, with three technical replicates per trial. Time-matched controls
were included for all studies using the non-invasive E. coli strain HB101 and
untreated samples (latter for imaging studies).
Immunohistochemical proﬁling
Fixation, staining and imaging of 3-D aggregates was performed as
previously described.7, 10 Samples were imaged using a Leica TCS SP5
microscope. Images were processed using Leica LAS software. For 3-D
perspectives, image stacks acquired by CLSM were median ﬁltered using a
(3 × 3) kernel for noise reduction and then gamma corrected (gamma 0.75)
to compensate for image dynamic range. Processed image stacks for each
ﬂuorescence channel were then rendered as 3-D perspective surface using
an isovolume ﬁlter with the open-source image visualization engine
ParaView (Henderson A. 2007. ParaView Guide, A Parallel Visualization
Application. Kitware, Inc.). Antibodies were purchased from Abcam (CD45,
β-catenin, CD84); Life Technologies (ZO-1, MUC5AC); BioLegend (CD68);
Kamiya Biomedical (Sialyl Lewis A); and KPL (Salmonella CSA-1). All
antibodies were used at a ﬁnal dilution of 1:50 in blocking solution (3%
BSA, 0.05% Triton X-100 in DPBS) with the exception of anti-β-catenin and
anti-Sialyl Lewis A, which were used at a ﬁnal dilution of 1:100. Goat anti-
mouse secondary antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) was
used at a 1:500 dilution in blocking solution for detecting primary
antibodies, with the exception of anti-CD68 and anti-Salmonella CSA-1,
which were FITC-conjugated. For dual labeling purposes with CD45 and
MUC5AC, a goat anti-mouse secondary antibody was used that was
conjugated with Alexa Fluor 555 (Life Technologies).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Carolyn Coyne for helpful discussions and Debra Baluch for her kind
imaging help. Funded by NASA grant NNX13AM01G (C.A.N., J.B., and C.M.O.), and NIH
R01-AI081759 (C.A.N.). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Experiment design: C.N., J.B., J.Y., A.C., S.S., C.O., B.C., C.L.; Conducted experiments: J.B.,
J.Y., A.C., S.S., Y.L., C.N., S.N., R.F., R.D., M.N., S.C., H.Q.; Data analysis: J.B., J.Y., C.N., A.C.,
C.O., Y.L., M.N., S.C., B.C., S.S.; Writing: J.B., J.Y., C.N., C.O., A.C.; Review & editing: C.N.,
J.B., J.Y., C.O., A.C., K.R., K.B.; S.N., R.F., C.S., M.N., S.C., B.C., and H.Q.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare they have no completing ﬁnancial interests in relation to the
work described.
REFERENCES
1. Finlay, B. B. & Brumell, J. H. Salmonella interactions with host cells: in vitro to
in vivo. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 355, 623–631 (2000).
2. Hebrard, M., Kroger, C., Sivasankaran, S. K., Handler, K. & Hinton, J. C. The chal-
lenge of relating gene expression to the virulence of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 22, 200–210 (2011).
3. Haraga, A., Ohlson, M. B. & Miller, S. I. Salmonellae interplay with host cells. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 6, 53–66 (2008).
4. Barrila, J. et al. Organotypic 3D cell culture models: using the rotating wall
vessel to study host-pathogen interactions. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8, 791–801
(2010).
5. Duell, B. L., Cripps, A. W., Schembri, M. A. & Ulett, G. C. Epithelial cell coculture
models for studying infectious diseases: beneﬁts and limitations. J. Biomed. Bio-
technol. 2011, 9 (2011).
6. Forbester, J. L. et al. Interaction of salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium with
intestinal organoids derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Infect.
Immun. 83, 2926–2934 (2015).
7. Radtke, A. L., Wilson, J. W., Sarker, S. & Nickerson, C. A. Analysis of interactions of
Salmonella type three secretion mutants with 3-D intestinal epithelial cells. PLoS
One 5, e15750 (2010).
8. Spottl, T. et al. A new organotypic model to study cell interactions in the
intestinal mucosa. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 18, 901–909 (2006).
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
10
npj Microgravity (2017)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA

9. Spöttl, T. et al. Monocyte differentiation in intestine-like macrophage phenotype
induced by epithelial cells. J. Leukoc. Biol. 70, 241–251 (2001).
10. Crabbe, A. et al. Alveolar epithelium protects macrophages from quorum
sensing-induced cytotoxicity in a three-dimensional co-culture model. Cell
Microbiol. 13, 469–481 (2011).
11. Bergmann, S. & Steinert, M. From single cells to engineered and explanted tis-
sues: new perspectives in bacterial infection biology. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 319,
1–44 (2015).
12. Schmeichel, K. L. & Bissell, M. J. Modeling tissue-speciﬁc signaling and organ
function in three dimensions. J. Cell. Sci. 116, 2377–2388 (2003).
13. Crabbe, A., Ledesma, M. A. & Nickerson, C. A. Mimicking the host and its
microenvironment in vitro for studying mucosal infections by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Pathog. Dis. 71, 1–19 (2014).
14. Schwarz, R. P., Goodwin, T. J. & Wolf, D. A. Cell culture for three-dimensional
modeling in rotating-wall vessels: an application of simulated microgravity. J.
Tissue Cult. Methods 14, 51–57 (1992).
15. Nickerson, C. A. & Ott, C. M. A new dimension in modeling infectious disease. ASM
News 70, 169–175 (2004).
16. De Weirdt, R. et al. Glycerol supplementation enhances L. reuteri’s protective
effect against S. Typhimurium colonization in a 3-D model of colonic epithelium.
PLoS One 7, e37116 (2012).
17. Honer zu Bentrup, K. et al. Three-dimensional organotypic models of human
colonic epithelium to study the early stages of enteric salmonellosis. Microb.
Infect. 8, 1813–1825 (2006).
18. Nickerson, C. A. et al. Three-dimensional tissue assemblies: novel models for the
study of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium pathogenesis. Infect. Immun.
69, 7106–7120 (2001).
19. Carvalho, H. M., Teel, L. D., Goping, G. & O’Brien, A. D. A three-dimensional tissue
culture model for the study of attach and efface lesion formation by enter-
opathogenic
and
enterohaemorrhagic
Escherichia
coli.
Cell.
Microbiol.
7,
1771–1781 (2005).
20. Alcantara Warren, C. et al. Detection of epithelial-cell injury, and quantiﬁcation of
infection, in the HCT-8 organoid model of cryptosporidiosis. J. Infect. Dis. 198,
143–149 (2008).
21. Duray, P. H., Hatﬁll, S. J. & Pellis, N. R. Tissue culture in microgravity. Sci. Med. 4,
46–55 (1997).
22. Hu, Q. et al. Salmonella enterica serovar Senftenberg human clinical isolates
lacking SPI-1. J. Clin. Microbiol. 46, 1330–1336 (2008).
23. Chowdhury, R., Mandal, R. S., Ta, A. & Das, S. An AIL family protein promotes type
three secretion system-1-independent invasion and pathogenesis of Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhi. Cell Microbiol. 17, 486–503 (2015).
24. Jones, M. A., Wigley, P., Page, K. L., Hulme, S. D. & Barrow, P. A. Salmonella enterica
serovar Gallinarum requires the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III
secretion system but not the Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 type III secretion
system for virulence in chickens. Infect. Immun. 69, 5471–5476 (2001).
25. Morgan, E. et al. Identiﬁcation of host-speciﬁc colonization factors of Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium. Mol. Microbiol. 54, 994–1010 (2004).
26. Rychlik, I. et al. Virulence potential of ﬁve major pathogenicity islands (SPI-1 to
SPI-5) of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis for chickens. BMC Microbiol. 9, 268
(2009).
27. Jeong, J. H. et al. Salmonella enterica serovar gallinarum requires ppGpp
for internalization and survival in animal cells. J. Bacteriol. 190, 6340–6350
(2008).
28. Xu, T., Maloy, S. & McGuire, K. L. Macrophages inﬂuence Salmonella host-
speciﬁcity in vivo. Microb. Pathog. 47, 212–222 (2009).
29. Vladoianu, I.-R., Chang, H. R. & Pechère, J.-C. Expression of host resistance to
Salmonella typhi and Salmonella typhimurium: bacterial survival within macro-
phages of murine and human origin. Microb. Pathog. 8, 83–90 (1990).
30. Schwan, W. R., Huang, X. Z., Hu, L. & Kopecko, D. J. Differential bacterial survival,
replication, and apoptosis-inducing ability of Salmonella serovars within human
and murine macrophages. Infect. Immun. 68, 1005–1013 (2000).
31. Pascopella, L. et al. Host restriction phenotypes of Salmonella typhi and Salmo-
nella gallinarum. Infect. Immun. 63, 4329–4335 (1995).
32. Kingsley, R. A. et al. Epidemic multiple drug resistant Salmonella Typhimurium
causing invasive disease in sub-Saharan Africa have a distinct genotype. Genome
Res. 19, 2279–2287 (2009).
33. Bishop, A. et al. Interaction of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi with cultured
epithelial cells: roles of surface structures in adhesion and invasion. Microbiology
154, 1914–1926 (2008).
34. Yang, J. et al. Characterization of the invasive, multidrug resistant non-typhoidal
Salmonella strain D23580 in a murine model of infection. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 9,
e0003839 (2015).
35. Parsons, B. N. et al. Invasive non-typhoidal Salmonella typhimurium ST313 are not
host-restricted and have an invasive phenotype in experimentally infected
chickens. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 7, e2487 (2013).
36. Okoro, C. K. et al. Signatures of adaptation in human invasive Salmonella
Typhimurium ST313 Populations from Sub-Saharan Africa. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 9,
e0003611 (2015).
37. Drummond, C. G., Nickerson, C. A. & Coyne, C. B. A three-dimensional cell culture
model to study enterovirus infection of polarized intestinal Epithelial cells.
mSphere 1, e00030-15 (2016).
38. Colgan, S. P. & Taylor, C. T. Hypoxia: an alarm signal during intestinal inﬂam-
mation. Nature reviews. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 7, 281–287 (2010).
39. Trowbridge, I. S. & Thomas, M. L. CD45: an emerging role as a protein tyrosine
phosphatase required for lymphocyte activation and development. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 12, 85–116 (1994).
40. de la Fuente, M. A., Pizcueta, P., Nadal, M., Bosch, J. & Engel, P. CD84
leukocyte antigen is a new member of the Ig superfamily. Blood 90, 2398–2405
(1997).
41. Leonard, F., Collnot, E.-M. & Lehr, C.-M. A three-dimensional coculture of enter-
ocytes, monocytes and dendritic cells to model inﬂamed intestinal mucosa
in vitro. Mol. Pharm. 7, 2103–2119 (2010).
42. Pier, G. B. et al. Salmonella typhi uses CFTR to enter intestinal epithelial cells.
Nature 393, 79–82 (1998).
43. Lyczak, J. B. & Pier, G. B. Salmonella enterica serovar typhi modulates cell surface
expression of its receptor, the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance reg-
ulator, on the intestinal epithelium. Infect. Immun. 70, 6416–6423 (2002).
44. Marchelletta, R. R. et al. Altered expression and localization of ion transporters
contribute to diarrhea in mice with Salmonella-induced enteritis. Gastro-
enterology 145, 1358–1368 (2013). e1351-1354.
45. Smith, P. D. et al. Intestinal macrophages and response to microbial encroach-
ment. Mucosal Immunol. 4, 31–42 (2011).
46. Lee, S. H., Starkey, P. M. & Gordon, S. Quantitative analysis of total macrophage
content in adult mouse tissues. Immunochemical studies with monoclonal
antibody F4/80. J. Exp. Med. 161, 475–489 (1985).
47. Salerno-Goncalves, R., Fasano, A. & Sztein, M. B. Engineering of a multicellular
organotypic model of the human intestinal mucosa. Gastroenterology 141,
e18–20 (2011).
48. Murray, P. J. & Wynn, T. A. Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage
subsets. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 723–737 (2011).
49. Mills, S. D. & Finlay, B. B. Comparison of Salmonella typhi and Salmonella typhi-
murium invasion, intracellular growth and localization in cultured human epi-
thelial cells. Microb. Pathog. 17, 409–423 (1994).
50. Ramachandran, G., Perkins, D. J., Schmidlein, P. J., Tulapurkar, M. E. & Tennant, S.
M. Invasive Salmonella Typhimurium ST313 with naturally attenuated ﬂagellin
elicits reduced inﬂammation and replicates within macrophages. PLoS Negl. Trop.
Dis. 9, e3394 (2015).
51. Weinstein, D. L., O’Neill, B. L., Hone, D. M. & Metcalf, E. S. Differential early
interactions between Salmonella enterica serovar typhi and two other patho-
genics almonella serovars with intestinal epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 66,
2310–2318 (1998).
52. Parkhill, J. et al. Complete genome sequence of a multiple drug resistant Sal-
monella enterica serovar Typhi CT18. Nature 413, 848–852 (2001).
53. McClelland, M. et al. Complete genome sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium LT2. Nature. 413, 852–856 (2001).
54. Deng, W. et al. Comparative genomics of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strains
Ty2 and CT18. J. Bacteriol. 185, 2330–2337 (2003).
55. Liu, S. L. & Sanderson, K. E. Rearrangements in the genome of the bacterium
Salmonella typhi. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 1018–1022 (1995).
56. Pickard,
D.
et
al.
Composition,
acquisition,
and
distribution
of
the
Vi
exopolysaccharide-encoding Salmonella enterica pathogenicity island SPI-7. J.
Bacteriol. 185, 5055–5065 (2003).
57. Townsend, S. M. et al. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi possesses a unique
repertoire of ﬁmbrial gene sequences. Infect. Immun. 69, 2894–2901 (2001).
58. Zhang, X. L. et al. Salmonella enterica serovar typhi uses type IVB pili to enter
human intestinal epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 68, 3067–3073 (2000).
59. Bravo, D. et al. Type IVB pili are required for invasion but not for adhesion of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi into BHK epithelial cells in a cystic ﬁbrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator-independent manner. Microb. Pathog. 51,
373–377 (2011).
60. Forest, C. et al. Contribution of the stg ﬁmbrial operon of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhi during interaction with human cells. Infect. Immun. 75, 5264–5271
(2007).
61. Berrocal, L. et al. stg ﬁmbrial operon from S. typhi STH2370 contributes to
association and cell disruption of epithelial and macrophage-like cells. Biol. Res.
48, 34 (2015).
62. Ribet, D. & Cossart, P. How bacterial pathogens colonize their hosts and invade
deeper tissues. Microb. Infect. 17, 173–183 (2015).
63. Yue, M. et al. Allelic variation contributes to bacterial host speciﬁcity. Nat. Com-
mun. 6, 8754 (2015).
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
11
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
npj Microgravity (2017)

64. Grifﬁth, L. G. & Swartz, M. A. Capturing complex 3D tissue physiology in vitro. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 211–224 (2006).
65. Yamada, K. M. & Cukierman, E. Modeling tissue morphogenesis and cancer in 3D.
Cell 130, 601–610 (2007).
66. Striz, I., Slavcev, A., Kalanin, J., Jaresova, M. & Rennard, S. I. Cell–-cell contacts with
epithelial cells modulate the phenotype of human macrophages. Inﬂammation
25, 241–246 (2001).
67. Gordon, M. A. et al. Epidemics of invasive Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis
and S. enterica Serovar typhimurium infection associated with multidrug
resistance among adults and children in Malawi. Clin. Infect. Dis. 46, 963–969
(2008).
68. Feasey, N. A., Dougan, G., Kingsley, R. A., Heyderman, R. S. & Gordon, M. A.
Invasive non-typhoidal salmonella disease: an emerging and neglected tropical
disease in Africa. Lancet 379, 2489–2499 (2012).
69. Herrero-Fresno, A. et al. The role of the st313-td gene in virulence of Salmonella
Typhimurium ST313. PLoS One 9, e84566 (2014).
70. Carden, S., Okoro, C., Dougan, G. & Monack, D. Non-typhoidal Salmonella
Typhimurium ST313 isolates that cause bacteremia in humans stimulate less
inﬂammasome activation than ST19 isolates associated with gastroenteritis.
Pathog. Dis. 73, ftu023 (2015).
71. Lee, C. A. & Falkow, S. The ability of Salmonella to enter mammalian cells is
affected by bacterial growth state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 4304–4308 (1990).
72. Ernst, R. K., Dombroski, D. M. & Merrick, J. M. Anaerobiosis, type 1 ﬁmbriae, and
growth phase are factors that affect invasion of HEp-2 cells by Salmonella
typhimurium. Infect. Immun. 58, 2014–2016 (1990).
73. Schiemann, D. A. & Shope, S. R. Anaerobic growth of Salmonella typhimurium
results in increased uptake by Henle 407 epithelial and mouse peritoneal cells
in vitro and repression of a major outer membrane protein. Infect. Immun. 59,
437–440 (1991).
74. Sheppard, M. et al. Dynamics of bacterial growth and distribution within the liver
during Salmonella infection. Cell Microbiol. 5, 593–600 (2003).
75. Brown, S. P. et al. Intracellular demography and the dynamics of Salmonella
enterica infections. PLoS Biol. 4, e349 (2006).
76. Grant, A. J. et al. Bacterial growth rate and host factors as determinants of
intracellular bacterial distributions in systemic Salmonella enterica infections.
Infect. Immun. 77, 5608–5611 (2009).
77. Mastroeni, P., Grant, A., Restif, O. & Maskell, D. A dynamic view of the spread and
intracellular distribution of Salmonella enterica. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7, 73–80
(2009).
78. Grant, A. J. et al. Attenuated Salmonella Typhimurium lacking the pathogenicity
island-2 type 3 secretion system grow to high bacterial numbers inside phago-
cytes in mice. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1003070 (2012).
79. Forest, C. G., Ferraro, E., Sabbagh, S. C. & Daigle, F. Intracellular survival of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi in human macrophages is independent
of
Salmonella
pathogenicity
island
(SPI)-2.
Microbiology
156,
3689–3698
(2010).
80. Sabbagh, S. C., Forest, C. G., Lepage, C., Leclerc, J.-M. & Daigle, F. So similar, yet so
different: uncovering distinctive features in the genomes of Salmonella enterica
serovars Typhimurium and Typhi. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 305, 1–13 (2010).
81. Monack, D. M., Raupach, B., Hromockyj, A. E. & Falkow, S. Salmonella typhimurium
invasion induces apoptosis in infected macrophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93,
9833–9838 (1996).
82. Sundstrom, C. & Nilsson, K. Establishment and characterization of a human his-
tiocytic lymphoma cell line (U-937). Int. J. Cancer 17, 565–577 (1976).
83. Rovera, G., Santoli, D. & Damsky, C. Human promyelocytic leukemia cells in cul-
ture differentiate into macrophage-like cells when treated with a phorbol diester.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76, 2779–2783 (1979).
84. Gao, X., Ray, R., Xiao, Y., Ishida, K. & Ray, P. Macrolide antibiotics improve che-
motactic and phagocytic capacity as well as reduce inﬂammation in sulfur
mustard-exposed monocytes. Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 23, 97–106 (2010).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the npj Microgravity website (doi:10.1038/s41526-017-0011-2).
3-D intestinal co-culture model for Salmonella infection
J Barrila et al.
12
npj Microgravity (2017)
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
