Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Toward sustainable space exploration: a
roadmap for harnessing the power of
microorganisms
Rosa Santomartino
1
, Nils J. H. Averesch
2,3, Marufa Bhuiyan4,
Charles S. Cockell
1, Jesse Colangelo
5, Yosephine Gumulya6,
Benjamin Lehner7, Ivanna Lopez-Ayala8, Sean McMahon
1,
Anurup Mohanty
9,10, Sergio R. Santa Maria
11,12, Camilla Urbaniak13,14,
Rik Volger
15, Jiseon Yang
16 & Luis Zea
17
Finding sustainable approaches to achieve independence from terrestrial
resources is of pivotal importance for the future of space exploration. This is
relevant not only to establish viable space exploration beyond low Earth–orbit,
but also for ethical considerations associated with the generation of space
waste and the preservation of extra-terrestrial environments. Here we propose
and highlight a series of microbial biotechnologies uniquely suited to establish
sustainable processes for in situ resource utilization and loop-closure. Micro-
bial biotechnologies research and development for space sustainability will be
translatable to Earth applications, tackling terrestrial environmental issues,
thereby supporting the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Humanity may be tempted to view the cosmos as a rich reservoir of
inﬁnite resources. However, the practical reality of space exploration
tells a different story. The need for sustainability in space explora-
tion, as well as the exploitation of space, is becoming more evident
with the strengthening desire for the expansion of human activities
beyond Earth-orbit, pursued by public and private sectors alike.
When applied to space, the concept of sustainability has often been
understood as "ensuring that all humanity can continue to use outer
space for peaceful purposes and socioeconomic beneﬁt now and in
the long term"1. Until now, it mainly referred to the need to control,
regulate, and remove space debris from low Earth orbit (LEO)2,3 and
planetary protection (which promotes the implementation and
development of the responsible exploration of the solar system, in
order to protect the space environments and Earth)3. As humans
aspire to venture into deep space, the deﬁnition of this concept shifts
and expands, and the self-sustainability of mission operations
becomes a critical aspect. Loop-closure, which indicates the recy-
cling and the reuse of resources toward the establishment of a cir-
cular economy, could greatly enhance the sustainability of space
exploration, and it is key not only to minimise the costs of resupply of
resources from Earth but also for ethical considerations associated
with space waste generation and the preservation of extra-terrestrial
environments4–10. The United Nations resolved that outer space
activities should minimise impacts on the space environment, as well
as on Earth, taking into account the 2030 agenda for Sustainable
Development11,12.
Received: 8 September 2022
Accepted: 1 March 2023
Check for updates
1UK Centre for Astrobiology, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. 2Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 3Center for Utilization of Biological Engineering in Space, Berkeley, CA, USA. 4Everest Innovation Lab, Honolulu, HI,
USA. 5Cemvita Factory, Westminster, CO, USA. 6Centre for Microbiome Research, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 7DMEC,
The Haag, Netherlands. 8Universidad del Valle de Guatemala, Guatemala City, Guatemala. 9Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, 600 1st Ave, Floor 1,
Seattle, WA 98104, USA. 10Department of Biotechnology, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, India. 11Space Biosciences, NASA Ames
Research Center, Mountain View, CA, USA. 12KBR, Moffett Field, Mountain View, CA, USA. 13NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, CA, USA. 14ZIN Technologies Inc, Middleburg Heights, OH, USA. 15Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands. 16Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. 17BioServe Space
Technologies, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
e-mail: rosa.santomartino@ed.ac.uk; luis.zea@colorado.edu
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

The biggest impediment to progress on this frontier is the lack of
deployable technologies enabling outposts, extended missions and, in
the future, settlements, to sustain themselves through in situ resource
utilization (ISRU) and maximised recycling of resources5. In addition to
mechanical/physical/chemical approaches, biotechnologies broadly
and microorganisms speciﬁcally will help enable long-term life-sup-
port and habitat systems’ performance (loop-closure), as well as ISRU,
manufacturing and energy collection/storage6,7,13–17. Microbiological
approaches can be self-sustaining with occasional monitoring and
maintenance, owing to their resilience, and could overall require less
energy than physicochemical approaches16.
Here, we focus on the pivotal roles that microorganisms can play
in the development of technologies for sustainable human exploration
of deep space, considering two main aspects: (i) the requirement for
mature biotechnologies and bioprocesses to allow near closed-loop
operations of mission functions, such as life-support, to increase
autonomy and sustainability; and (ii) the need to reduce supply chain
dependency for the expansion of human presence in space. The
approaches presented here are based on processes and technologies
currently implemented on Earth at different technology readiness
levels (TRL), which must be adapted to meet the speciﬁc requirements
and challenges of the space environment. Selecting the most suitable
bioprocess and most applicable microorganism for any given space
application is non-trivial, as terrestrial technologies are rarely readily
adaptable to the harsh conditions of space18. Therefore, extensive
research and development are compulsory to increase TRL to the
point where these technologies can be successfully implemented in
space16. Finally, microbial biotechnologies aimed to increase the sus-
tainability of space exploration may be translatable to Earth applica-
tions for advancement towards a circular economy, further supporting
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)11,12.
Habitat air bioremediation
A spacecraft’s Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS)
manages water supply, atmospheric pressure and composition (O2,
CO2, and inert-gas levels), temperature and relative humidity, as
appropriate for human operations and conducive to comfortable
living19. Carbon dioxide on the International Space Station (ISS) is
currently scrubbed from the cabin air and converted in a Sabatier
reaction to recover oxygen, while the by-product (methane) is vented
into space. This has two drawbacks: (i) hydrogen is required as a
substrate, production of which is energy intense; (ii) hydrogen and
carbon are lost, requiring constant resupply. Recycling CO2 and/or
methane back into the organic matter could improve loop-closure and
preserve resources. Microbial bioremediation can support the removal
of CO2 from the atmosphere in habitats, while also supplementing the
generation of breathable oxygen20. The captured carbon may be
upcycled again and reintegrated into the resource cycle, e.g., for the
biomanufacturing of food/supplements. Alternatively, captured car-
bon may be sequestered for end-use (Fig. 1), e.g., for bioconcrete
production or microbial-electrolytic carbon capture, as described
later. Direct air capture of CO2 could reduce the need for energy-
intensive auxiliary processes and shorten the recycling loop21.
Researchers at the Center of Applied Space Technology and Micro-
gravity (ZARM, University of Bremen, Germany) are exploring the
application of cyanobacteria like Anabaena sp. PCC 7938 in a Martian
context, taking advantage of its carbon- (photosynthetic) and
nitrogen-ﬁxing (diazotrophic) capabilities. Low carbon concentration
in habitats or spacecraft yields a conversion efﬁciency two- to ﬁve-fold
lower than with preconcentrated CO2
22. Hence, the most applicable
approach will strongly depend on the mission scenario, in terms of
size, extent and duration. Reversible carbon scrubbers23 combined
with microbial conversion may enable a sustainable and near-closed
process for deep space travel and exploration missions or initial
human settlements24,25.
Human waste processing and reclamation
Human waste management poses a challenge for human space
exploration, and proposed solutions commonly focus on how to
compact, sterilise and dispose of human waste, rather than recycling
it26. On the ISS, human waste is currently stabilised, dried and ejected
from the station to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere27. This method is
clearly not sustainable for long-distance missions, as it represents a
sink of potentially useful resources. Solid human waste could instead
be used as a feedstock for production of food and edible supplements,
as well as nutrients/fertiliser for microbial or plant-based Life Support
System (LSS) components (Fig. 1). Many physicochemical approaches
to solid waste management, such as pyrolysis or incineration, are being
proposed26. However, microbiologically supported processes could
enhance human waste recycling by enhancing loop-closure. The Eur-
opean Space Agency (ESA) supported MELiSSA project (Micro-Ecolo-
gical
Life
Support
System
Alternative)
includes
a
series
of
interconnected bioreactors for LSS; it is a good example of how
diverse types of waste-streams, including human metabolic end-pro-
ducts, could be upcycled using microorganisms5. Although anaerobic
waste processing is usually considered less time-efﬁcient than aerobic
methods, it can achieve comparable degradation rates as physico-
chemical processes. A two-component system, which anaerobically
converts liquid and solid human waste to protein- and lipid-rich
microbial biomass for food production, has been developed28.
Food production
The ability to produce food in space will be of paramount importance
to achieve sustainability and self-sufﬁciency on long-duration space
missions and may be signiﬁcantly enhanced by microbial biotechnol-
ogy. For example, the plant microbiome will play a pivotal role in the
success of crop production in space. As with the human microbiome,
the plant-associated microbial community provides a multitude of
beneﬁts to the host, such as promoting plant growth, stimulating
phytohormone
production,
controlling
pathogens,
regulating
immune function, and alleviating abiotic and biotic stressors29. Sym-
biotic bacteria are also essential in solubilizing nutrients from the
environment and converting them into bioavailable forms, and
improving soil fertility29,30. Nitrogen recovery for food production can,
for instance, be accomplished by microbial-mediated nitrogen ﬁxation
from the atmosphere, or nitriﬁcation of urine, mediated by synthetic
microbial communities (see section ‘Human waste processing and
reclamation’)31.
For long-duration space travel, the use of agricultural probiotics
should be considered to help grow robust, stable, and healthy crops in
space. Agricultural probiotics are already used in farming on Earth as
plant biostimulants32, as biofertilisers33 and for bioremediation to
improve soil quality34. A better understanding of how the composition
and function of the plant microbiome changes in spaceﬂight can help
to customise probiotic supplements for space farming. For example,
the concept of rhizobial inoculants is already in practice: seeds are
inoculated with chosen strains of bacteria and fungi that can improve
crop productivity and environmental sustainability35. Additional attri-
butes of the inoculum geared towards spaceﬂight could also consist of
bacteria/fungi
that help maximise resource efﬁciency,
thereby
requiring less input for optimal growth. Algae and cyanobacteria may
be cultivated not only for air revitalization, as discussed before, but
also as a food source and to support plant growth9,20.
For successful human outposts on the Moon or Mars, crews will
have to produce their own food, taking advantage of local (in situ)
resources, like regolith (see the section ‘Soil remediation’). Agricultural
methods may include soil-based farming, hydroponics, cellular agri-
culture, etc. Creation of a greenhouse-like infrastructure, by the
example of the ISS’ Advanced Plant Habitat36, and sufﬁcient light, water
supply, soil nutrients, and other necessary parameters for crop growth
may enhance loop-closure. These and other resources could be
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
2

obtained from other (biologically supported) LSS and ISRU compart-
ments (Fig. 1).
Pharmaceutical synthesis
The idea of in situ manufacturing of drugs in space and taking
advantage of microgravity has been around for decades37. The slower
growth of crystals in the microgravity environment has enabled the
discovery of new compounds38,39. The altered expression of microbial
virulence and/or pathogenesis-related genes in space can elucidate the
underlying mechanisms and assist with identifying new vaccines and
treatments39,40. The space environment also brings physiological
changes to astronauts during space ﬂight39, providing accelerated
models for aging and disease in drug discovery41. In the context of
human exploration to the Moon or Mars, having a pharmaceutical
foundry in space can remove the dependency on a supply of medicines
from Earth and provide ways to manufacture drugs on demand39. Many
of the carry-along pharmaceuticals will expire during a Mars-return
mission of standard duration (1.5 or 2.7 years), or have reduced
potency due to exposure to the space environment42, which tends
to alter the active pharmaceutical ingredients and increases the
concentrations of degradants or impurities42. To date, no studies
have been reported on the stability of biological drugs such as
monoclonal antibodies, versatile therapeutics capable of treating
various space-relevant diseases, including osteoporosis, infections and
inﬂammations.
Microbes have long been used on Earth for the production of
pharmaceuticals and high-value chemicals. Given the extreme condi-
tions and limited resources in space environments, spore-forming
bacteria (resisting radiation and/or desiccation), extremophiles and
extremotolerants
(resisting
harsh
environments),
and
photo-
autotrophs (surviving on inorganic carbon, e.g., cyanobacteria) have
been sent to space to investigate their potential for application in
biomanufacturing. Where necessary, microbes may also be engineered
for the production of pharmaceuticals in space, which is not a trivial
task, given the often complex biosynthetic routes to compounds of
interest, as well as the diversity thereof. This also impacts downstream
processing, given the stringent requirements for, e.g., purity, and
because a one-ﬁts-all solution rarely exists43. Computational and
minerals
urea
F
o
o
d
 
a
n
d
 
m
e
d
i
c
i
n
e
 
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
regolith
regolith
R
e
g
o
l
i
t
h
b
i
o
r
e
r
m
e
d
i
a
t
a
i
o
n
a
n
d
b
i
o
m
i
n
i
n
g
bio-
reactors
W
a
W
s
t
s
e
t
r
e
r
c
y
c
c
y
l
i
n
g
bioreactors
consum.
e-waste
plastic
H
u
m
a
n
h
a
b
i
t
a
t
a
s
a
n
d
l
a
b
o
r
a
r
t
a
o
r
i
e
s
Sabatier
reactor
H2
CH4
Electrolyser
H2O
H2O
purifier
H2O
H2O
CO2
O2
O2
H2O
O2
H2O (used)
CO2
minerals, carbon
soil, minerals
H2O
O2
fertiliser
O2
bioreactors
carbon
O2
H2O
food,
 m
e
di
ci
n
e
co
n
s
u
m
a
b
les, hardwar
e
, 
e
-
w
aste
H2O
raw materials
Fig. 1 | Graphical rendering of a microbial biotechnology-based life-support
system in an agnostic space environment. Microorganisms are included in all
the functional compartments, including the ‘Human habitats and laboratories’ (i.e.,
human microbiome) and those that also require mechanochemical reactors. Up-
and recycling of different resource streams and loop-closure is indicated by white
arrows, supported by in situ resource utilization (coloured arrows), as applicable.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
3

synthetic biology tools have been used to simplify the complicated
metabolic pathways of conventional biotechnological drug produc-
tion. For instance, acetaminophen, a versatile drug to treat infection
and pain, was proposed to be synthesised by extending the shikimate
(also known as chorismate) pathway of the cyanobacterium Synecho-
cystis sp. PCC 680344. Microbial recombinant protein expression may
also be affected in space environments45. Some studies showed that
protein production in Pichia pastoris, Escherichia coli, or Sacchar-
omyces cerevisiae was higher in simulated microgravity than in Earth-
gravity45.
Given that the upcoming exploration missions will go beyond
LEO, studies of space pharmaceutical synthesis are mainly focused on
compounds or nutrients for countering microgravity-induced osteo-
penia and acute radiation syndrome43. Furthermore, there are efforts
to investigate ways to compensate for the weakened immune system
of astronauts during long-duration space missions, which can be
addressed by the consumption of probiotics or prebiotics to maintain
a healthy gut microbiome39,46.
A source of microbes that is becoming increasingly relevant for
pharmaceutical biosynthesis is the human gut microbiome. A recent
metagenomic analysis from the Human Microbiome Project showed
that human-associated bacteria encode the biosynthetic machinery to
synthesise a vast array of secondary metabolites, such as small bioac-
tive molecules (e.g. antibiotics). Many studies have investigated the
changes in the composition and functionality of the gut microbiome
during spaceﬂight and in analogue studies47. The use of curated
microbial communities (e.g. those that consist of non-pathogenic
strains) could be considered to reduce the risk of infectious diseases48.
Biomining
Beyond LEO, the cost of the development of infrastructure increases
dramatically. Therefore, a cost-effective supply of resources is
required. One option is to harness in situ resources available at the
destination through biomining44,49–51. Biomining, the use of micro-
organisms to extract valuable metals from crude minerals (e.g., rego-
lith) and mine waste52, has seen extensive effort for adaptation to space
applications50,51,53–56. Space biomining is primarily limited by econom-
ics: biologically mediated processes are often less expensive and less
environmentally harmful than hydrometallurgical processes but can
rarely provide the same high rates of separation. However, when taking
into account the environmental and health costs associated with
mining activities on Earth, biomining is already cost-effective for a
variety of resources (copper, gold, nickel and cobalt extraction are all
performed at a commercial scale)57.
Chemolithoautotrophs
(e.g.,
iron
and/or
sulphur-oxidizing
microorganisms) could be suitable for biomining of sulphide miner-
als, occurring in a variety of settings on Mars or in asteroidal
materials58. Microorganisms with other nutritional preferences (e.g.,
organotrophs), consortia, or bioengineering techniques could be used
elsewhere: the Lunar surface is mainly composed of silica-saturated
rocks, with a generally low sulphur content50,54. The need for organic
nutrients to feed organotrophic microorganisms, which is limited by
the availability of carbon in space environments, could be at least
partially satisﬁed in a closed-loop system (Fig. 1).
Microbial extraction of rare earth elements and vanadium from
basalt54,55,58, and platinum group elements from L-chondrite meteoritic
material has been demonstrated on the ISS55,56,59. However, further
investigations are required to demonstrate the scalability of these
systems, improve performance, and adapt the technology to other
elements of interest (e.g., silicon, iron, aluminium). Water, oxygen,
hydrogen as wellas other criticalmolecules and elements could also be
obtained via biomining50. These are essential compounds not only
from the biotechnological perspective but indeed for any human
activity. Knowledge of the ability to perform biomining under Lunar
and Martian conditions is scarce or of theoretical character50,51 and
efforts toward advancing bioleaching capability from extra-terrestrial
regolith under space conditions, and toward the development of
bioengineering and synthetic biology approaches, are critical to
mature technologies.
While prospecting is inherently not sustainable in the long run
because of the inevitable depletion of resources (i.e., the ores, in the
case of mining), biomining is generally considered more envir-
onmentally friendly than traditional mining because it avoids the use
of toxic inorganic reagents. This also matters for extra-terrestrial
applications, as it could reduce the need of auxiliary resources. It has
been proposed that a biomining reactor could be added to a bior-
egenerative LSS50, hence contributing to loop-closure and ISRU (Fig. 1).
Structural biomanufacturing: bioconcrete,
myco-architecture
Construction and maintenance of infrastructure beyond Earth is a
necessary yet daunting task considering the scarce resource avail-
ability. Conventional methods of construction utilise large amounts of
raw materials and require steady maintenance. To make construction
and infrastructure maintenance more sustainable, prioritizing repair
over a replacement will be essential and can be facilitated by biological
self-healing materials.
Concrete and cement are essential on Earth for construction and
binding materials. While likely not being used to the same extent in
space due to mass constraints, surface structures may to some degree
require the binding of minerals for construction. Microbially induced
calcite precipitation (MICP), for example, is a biogeochemical process
whereby microorganisms precipitate calcium carbonate (CaCO3)60,
which can be used as a binding agent61. Additionally, MICP can also
help
in
the
bioremediation
of
toxic
compounds
and
CO2
sequestration62,63. Microbial-electrolytic carbon capture could be uti-
lised to sequester CO2, and it has been estimated that in the United
States, 68 million tons of CO2 per year could be captured by this
process64.
Impact events pulverise regolith on planetary surfaces over time,
forming extremely ﬁne dust that can hinder equipment function and
cause harm to humans65. Bacteria with MICP capability could be used
to bind and harden regolith, consolidating the dust66. Similarly, cya-
nobacterial bioﬁlms may be useful to control and bind ﬁne regolith67.
Byproducts of urea degradation-based MICP, such as ammonium and
nitrate, could be further upcycled into a closed-loop system (Fig. 1).
However, when the release of toxic byproducts must be avoided68,
alternative microorganisms for calcium carbonate precipitation can be
used (e.g., the methane-oxidizing bacterium Methylocystis parvus)69.
Fungi-based biotechnologies may provide another opportunity to
produce sturdy and resistant structures for space applications. Myco-
architecture refers to the production of rigid structural components
and surfaces using fungi. Fungal mycelia can form dense networks that
combine with other materials, like e.g. regolith, to form mycelium-
based composites. These are commonly used in various industries on
Earth70. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
has explored this solution for space exploration, by utilizing mycelia as
a means to construct rugged furniture and habitat shells for the Mar-
tian and Lunar surfaces71. While research for space applications is in its
infancy, the extraordinary resilience of fungi has even been a subject of
investigation for radioprotection72. This potentially provides for in situ
manufacturing of robust and self-regenerating structures, and engi-
neered living materials, thus avoiding the need for excessive re-supply,
and improving the sustainability of space exploration by mitigating the
supply chain from Earth.
Biological collection and storage of energy
Energy collection and storage (e.g., of fuels) is a critical challenge in
any remote environment and is particularly dependent on supply
chain consistency. Certain anaerobic bacteria (so-called ‘electricigens’,
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
4

e.g., Desulfuromonas, Geobacter, etc.) can reduce organic waste to
generate electric current. Speciﬁcally, microbial fuel cells (MFC) utilise
microbes to convert chemically bound energy into electricity73. Har-
nessing the reducing power of organic waste to generate electricity,
MFC could be coupled with in situ ﬂow-through waste remediation
systems44. Such microbial systems can be categorised into dark-
fermentation and photobiological processes, and they can use wet
biomass from, for example, waste streams74,75. In a similar fashion, and
quasi-opposed to MFC, microbial electrosynthesis (MES) can be used
to convert electricity (back) into chemical compounds for e.g., energy
storage, to bridge intermittent availability and demand76. Some evi-
dence also indicates the possibility of generating hydrogen through
nanoparticle production from Lunar regolith77,78. Hydrogen, methane,
and other biofuels can also be produced from other in situ resources,
such as water and inorganic carbon, photo- or lithoautotrophically
(e.g., with cyanobacteria and various algae species), to generate stable
energy carriers6,78. These could be liquid compounds with high energy
density, such as butanediol, as means for storage of energy, to sup-
plement or complement chemically derived bipropellants (hydrogen/
methane and oxygen)76,78. In many cases, using electricigens, hydro-
genic, methanogenic, and biofuel-producing microorganisms, waste
products and in situ resources can be upcycled for conversion, col-
lection and storage of energy with a higher yield and lower energy
input than traditional mechano-chemical approaches.
Recycling of electronics, plastics and other waste
streams
Currently, most efforts of developing highly efﬁcient systems for loop-
closure focus on recycling and upcycling of biological waste (e.g.,
food, black/grey/yellow water)79, while solutions for synthetic waste
(e.g., electronic waste, plastics, consumables) are largely unexplored,
and its current management is unviable in long-term missions26.
Valuable metals (Fe, Cu, rare earth elements, Al, Si, Zn), includ-
ing precious metals (Au, Pt and platinum group elements), as well as
certain non-metals (Cl, P, N and even O) can be recovered from
metallic structures and electronic devices with biology80. Reclaiming
metals from electronic waste (e.g., computer components, switch-
boards, solar panels) could reduce the need for resupply and/or the
more effortful sourcing from in situ resources through e.g., bio-
mining (see section 'Biomining')50,54. Physicochemical processes are
available; however, bioleaching technologies are considered more
environmentally friendly and sustainable, in terms of costs and
energy requirements81. The biochemical reactions implicated in
these processes are analogous to those involved in biomining (see
the section 'Biomining'), hence similar microorganisms and bio-
technologies could be used to recycle electronic waste82.
Plastics have become indispensable in our everyday life on Earth
being used, for instance, in the construction, packaging and manu-
facturing industries. Beyond the common Earth-analogue applications,
plastics, particularly those with high strength and durability, play a key
role in supporting human activities in space, as components of
spacecraft and spacesuits16. Most plastics are composed of organic
polymers derived from non-renewable fossil fuels83. In an environment
such as space, where fossil fuels are not available, recycling and
upcycling of plastics will be important to (i) obtain feedstock for
manufacturing to produce new consumables, (ii) re-use and recycle
resources and thus close the loop on carbon-based feedstocks, and (iii)
reduce waste disposal. Microorganisms have been shown to break
down microplastics into metabolisable compounds that can support
growth. The process, called biodegradation, offers exciting paths
towards a circular bioeconomy83, and researchers at the UK Centre for
Astrobiology (University of Edinburgh, UK) are exploring if these
microbial processes could also be leveraged for waste recycling in
space. Modern synthetic biology approaches could be used to pro-
gramme microbial pathways/functions tailored to extra-terrestrial
environments43,48, and use plastics as feedstock for upcycling and
produce useful molecules84,85. Complementary to the microbial plastic
biodegradation stands microbial production of plastics (e.g., bioplas-
tics). Certain microorganisms can use a variety of feedstock, including
CO2, CH4, or waste biomass, to produce bioplastics such as
polyhydroxyalkanoates4. These processes will enhance sustainability
by means of loop-closure, also because bioplastics are more readily
biodegradable than fossil-fuel-based polymers.
While not direct functions of life-support (as is the production of
e.g., food, oxygen, water), all the foregone microbial processes can
support LSS and vice versa, making long-duration spaceﬂight more
sustainable. For instance, metals deriving from electronic waste could
feed LSS compartments containing plants or microorganisms, which in
turn can enhance processes directly linked to LSS (Fig. 1)50.
Soil remediation
Heavy metals and toxic compounds, such as perchlorates, could be
removed from the Lunar and Martian regolith, allowing it to be used in
soil formation for food production86. To this aim, the removal of toxic
compounds is necessary due to the potential risk that their accumu-
lation in plant tissues poses for the crew87. As described above (see the
section 'Biomining'), microorganisms can bind and mobilise speciﬁc
elements from Lunar and Martian regolith53,88. This, together with the
removal of toxic elements and compounds (bioremediation), can
improve the quality of regolith as a plant-growth substrate89, drasti-
cally reducing the required resources for the continued operation of
plant-based LSS. Ultimately, this circular approach combines key ele-
ments of the processes described so far while enabling the production
of the food needed to sustain humans off-Earth and minimizing the
resources that need to be transported from Earth.
Bioremediation may be supported with proteobacteria, e.g.,
Sphingomonas, as well as fungi, such as Penicillium spp.90,91. Genetic
engineering of these organisms or other species could enable the
removal of perchlorates (e.g., conversion of perchlorates into mole-
cular chloride and oxygen87), as well as heavy metals, radioactive
species accumulation and conversion92, acids, salts, and organic pol-
lutants from extra-terrestrial regolith.
As microorganisms catalyse very speciﬁc reactions, their use can
result in highly efﬁcient use of resources, while leaving non-toxic
compounds unaltered. In addition, the energy requirements for bior-
emediation are generally lower than physicochemical alternatives such
as heat-treatment to decompose perchlorates. The last point might be
offset by required nutrients, which are not guaranteed to be available
in situ. However, these could be derived from the other biological LSS
compartments, including those described above. Current knowledge
on the applicability of these processes in space is limited, therefore a
better understanding of the mechanisms of bioremediation, microbial
behaviour in the space environment and its potential for soil formation
is desirable.
Technology needs and future research
A common technological denominator across most of the applications
discussed thus far is the need to provide a controlled environment for
the microbes and the functions they support or enable. Microbial
processes depend on temperature, pressure, oxygen availability (or
absence), pH, gravitational and radiation conditions, and other
factors93,94. These aspects drive (i) the technological need for bior-
eactors tailored to providing the appropriate environment for speciﬁc
processes, and (ii) the research needed to understand the effects of the
space environment on these processes, to identify the conditions that
maximise yield while minimising resources, engineering, and opera-
tional requirements.
From a technological perspective, the importance of developing
space-ready bioreactors is paramount. These will likely need to be
specialised for the application they support, although commonalities
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
5

among them are expected, which include: (i) providing and main-
taining a controlled environment (temperature, pressure, liquid/gas
composition), (ii) the ability for data collection in terms of the viability
of the engineered system and the microbes therein, as well as its
performance (including the chemical and physical status of the bulk
medium and gas as applicable), (iii) the presence of interfaces to
provide precursors, receive products, and attach downstream pro-
cessing equipment, (iv) the ability for on-demand sample collection,
(v) the ability to operate autonomously, at least partially; and (vi) the
appropriate level of containment to adhere to planetary protection
guidelines, which is particularly relevant for future Martian settle-
ments (notably, closed-loop systems have been identiﬁed as a poten-
tial solution from this perspective)95.
There will be differences depending on the application, for
example, the surface area to volume ratio (SAVR), e.g., micro-
biologically supported direct air-capture of CO2 with photoautotrophs
requires high SAVR to maximise the molar ratio of CO2 to microbes
and cellular exposure to light96. In contrast, some pharmaceutical
synthesis processes may be performed anaerobically and hence may
not depend on SAVR39. Another aspect that may vary in culture
volume: applications requiring high-SAVR will likely generate design
drivers with serpentine-like culturing volumes, particularly for pho-
totrophic organisms (similar to high-performance heat-exchangers),
while low-SAVR applications may be enabled with simpler cylindrical
tanks. This, in turn, may drive the systems’ need for ﬂuid ﬂow and
mixing94. There are multiple other aspects to consider that can also
impact process efﬁcacy, which is especially applicable in bioreactors
without stirring. Namely, these refer to mass transport phenomena,
both intra- and inter-phase (liquid–solid, gas–liquid, gas–solid), which
are dependent upon concentration gradients, temperature, etc., and
must be considered during bioreactor design.
Two technological needs relevant across applications will be data
acquisition and sample collection, which in several cases will require
gas/liquid/solid separation. On the Lunar and Martian surfaces, this
may occur naturally owing to the presence of (partial) gravity.
Operations taking place in microgravity (e.g., space stations and Mars-
transit vehicles), however, pose a more challenging engineering pro-
blem. Of particular interest from a biological perspective would be the
development of automated and real-time monitoring systems (growth
and production rate, titre and yield, pH, pO2, as well as inputs and
outputs), to allow characterization of system performance.
A requirement for any microbial-based biotechnology is liquid
water97, one of the most critical commodities for any long-term space
activity. On the ISS, water is currently obtained by the Water Recovery
System, which is part of ECLSS18: urine, humidity condensate, and
human waste are recycled to generate potable water, through multiple
processes including distillation, ﬁltration, high-temperature catalysis
and chemical disinfection98. This may not be sufﬁcient on long-
duration missions and, ultimately, settlements. Therefore, water
recovery must be improved by a more complete loop-closure (Fig. 1).
Moreover, additional water could be obtained from different locations
on the Moon and Mars, or from asteroids, by mechanic/physical pro-
cesses and/or biomining (see the section 'Biomining')50.
Additional technology needs include the compartmentalisation of
applications requiring a certain level of containment and isolation
from others. Some applications like MICP, soil-bioremediation and
myco-architecture may require exclusively dedicated compartments
to protect the rest of the surface base from otherwise unwanted
microbial communities and the regolith, which can have detrimental
effects on crew health and equipment, while others may be performed
in the same habitat-section (Fig. 1). Space conditions, especially the
high levels of radiation, showed to induce mutations, changing the
genotype of microbial systems in a way that the phenotype was
impacted93. These could affect the reliability and robustness of
microbial processes in space. Hence, technologies should include
radiation shielding where appropriate, strict and frequent control of
phenotypes and genotypes, as well as redundancies (e.g., protected
storage of the primary inoculum as backup).
Each of the categories described in the section 'Habitat air bior-
emediation' requires research to increase their TRL to nine, as
described in Fig. 2. This research will, in turn, need dedicated platforms
to perform research, for instance, access to microgravity and partial
gravities40,99, as well as space radiation. Research needs, in addition to
what is described in the former section, include bioﬁlm control stra-
tegies. Bioﬁlm formation has been a problem in every space station
from Salyut 6 to ISS and can cause operational disruption of ECLSS
equipment. This has been addressed via resupply from Earth, which
will not be possible for long-term missions beyond LEO100. Engineered
systems hosting microbial cultures for desired applications will be
naturally exposed to the risk of unwanted microbial bioﬁlm formation
(i.e., fouling).
This discussion motivates the following set of open research
questions: (i) how can microbial biotechnology enhance the sus-
tainability of long-term deep-space exploration missions and
settlements, waste-recycling, while preserving extra-terrestrial
environments? (ii) How can these processes be conducted while
adhering to planetary protection guidelines? (iii) What technol-
ogies are needed to monitor process efﬁciency? For each appli-
cation: (iv) what microorganisms (including genetically modiﬁed)
and cultivation conditions optimise the process in the relevant
gravitational and radiation environment? (v) What are the bior-
eactor, operational, and infrastructure requirements applicable to
implementing the process? (vi) How do we collect, extract, and
reﬁne aliquots and ﬁnal products obtained from the processes?
Beneﬁts for Earth
Space exploration has always been a catalyst and testbed for the
development of new technologies with applications on Earth (e.g.,
spin-off technologies)101. Space science’s implications for solving ter-
restrial environmental issues are not new, either. In fact, space activ-
ities are recognised by the United Nations as “essential tools for
realising the achievement of the SDGs”11,12. Further, space-based tech-
nologies are indispensable for monitoring weather and vegetation
patterns (natural as well as anthropogenic), deforestation, water
resources, plastic pollution, carbon emissions and climate change.
More speciﬁcally, space biotechnologies listed in this work could
provide powerful tools to support a number of speciﬁc SDGs, includ-
ing ‘Zero Hunger’ (Goal 2), ‘Good Health and Well-Being’ (Goal 3),
‘Clean Water and Sanitation’ (Goal 6), ‘Affordable and Clean Energy’
(Goal 7), ‘Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure’ (Goal 9), ‘Sustainable
Cities and Communities’ (Goal 11), ‘Responsible Consumption and
Production’ (Goal 12), and ‘Climate Action’ (Goal 13)11,12. In the future,
terrestrial environmental issues may be addressed by using space
biotechnologies deliberately designed to enhance sustainability: sys-
tems that allow tight loop-closure and near-ideal circular operation of
resources on a small scale are exemplary for application at a global
scale. This kind of tangible public beneﬁt is key not only for justifying
space exploration to funding agencies and governments but for
motivating scientists to invest their time and energy in space
exploration at a time when multiple overlapping crises threaten the
stability of our civilization and its ecological support systems.
Space agencies and organizations are aware of the signiﬁcant
potential of this concept. An increasing number of calls for proposals
are being launched with the aim of developing strategies to tackle
environmental problems on Earth by using space resources. In 2021,
ESA (i.e., ‘ESA Circular Economy Kick-Start Competition’)102 and NASA
(i.e., ‘Orbital Alchemy Challenge’)103 launched relevant competitions. In
2022, the Center for the Advancement of Science in Space (CASIS)
announced the ‘Beyond Plastics’ sustainability challenge (i.e., ‘CASIS
Beyond Plastics’)104, with the motto “What if the next great discovery to
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
6

improve our planet came from research off the planet?”. Notably, two
out of the three ﬁnalist projects, including the winner, involved the use
of microorganisms.
Many of the microbial-based space technologies and strategies
presented here have the potential to be transferred and pose beneﬁts
to terrestrial applications. Soil remediation techniques developed for
application on other terrestrial bodies could be used to help react to
soil pollution on Earth, identifying or engineering organisms suitable
for cleaning up and degrading speciﬁc contaminants, as well as
desertiﬁcation, using desiccation-resistant organisms. Similarly, tech-
nologies or plant/microbial genetic engineering could be used to allow
for crops to grow in less space with limited resources and deliver
comparable or higher yields.
Increased bacterial virulence in space ﬂight has the potential to
help identifying new targets for combating drug resistance37. On-
demand space manufacturing of pharmaceuticals could result in sim-
pler (e.g., fewer steps) yet ﬂexible drug production and puriﬁcation
than on Earth. This may transform the complex and hardly sustainable
production processes currently in use, replacing them with biomanu-
facturing and reducing the cost of pharmaceuticals, thus enabling
access to critical medication in remote locations with scarce resources.
Carbon-capture and -sequestration technologies will have direct
transfer potential for Earth application in the effort to counteract cli-
mate change.
In the energy transition, hydrogen is considered a cornerstone
for seasonal storage, industrial processes, and general grid balan-
cing. Biologically production of hydrogen, utilised in the context of
space technology, could advance the discovery of production
pathways for green hydrogen on Earth75. Research in bio-concrete
synthesis and myco-architecture will enhance the ways how
microorganisms can be employed for the construction and
maintenance of infrastructure. Like space, Earth also has various
extreme
conditions.
Engineering
microbes
for
infrastructure
maintenance can solve problems in remote and austere locations.
Improved and highly efﬁcient waste recycling, including but not
limited to organic/biological, plastic/consumable, and electronic
waste, for space applications could be translated back for Earth
applications to tackle terrestrial waste management issues, landﬁll
overﬂow and environmental pollution.
Conclusions
With this work, we aimed to advocate the urgency of sustainable
approaches for human space exploration, and the essential role
microbial biotechnologies could play in this. It has been discussed
how microbial biotechnologies may support several processes that,
in turn, can help decrease supply chain dependency (from Earth) on
long-duration
deep-space
exploration
missions
to
eventually
enable human footholds and settlements across the solar system. In
parallel, several of these microbially-supported processes may also
help close the loop on LSS and other systems, which can preserve
resources and extra-terrestrial environments. These two aspects,
independently and together, enable space exploration in a sus-
tainable fashion.
To provide appropriate conditions for the maturation of named
biotechnologies and to open the ﬁeld to a wider community, research
and innovation are needed. Preliminary studies should be supported in
laboratories on Earth, simulation platforms, and in LEO, and full
investigations in cis-Lunar space and on the Lunar surface. Augmenting
existing space-based facilities to increase the capacity for space
experiments, in terms of sample replicates and experimental condi-
tions, should also be considered to improve the impact of the pre-
liminary studies. Funding should take into account the high cost (and
Fig. 2 | Schematic representation of current technology readiness level (TRL) for the considered biotechnologies. Arrows indicate the speciﬁc research and
development needed to advance the TRL of each technology. TRL is deﬁned as indicated by NASA.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
7

time) of genetic engineering and synthetic biology, on which these
technologies will likely heavily rely.
Finally, the potential of these technologies for terrestrial ben-
eﬁts has been discussed, with speciﬁc reference to the United
Nation SDGs. If ultra-efﬁcient approaches to sustaining human life
and economic activity off-Earth can be adapted towards mean-
ingfully solving problems on our planet, space exploration will have
yielded a manifold return on public investments and will thereby
become more sustainable not only technologically, but also politi-
cally. The debate about the public beneﬁts of space travel and
exploration is healthy and necessary, but in the ﬁeld of sustain-
ability, space advocates may now have an opportunity to win this
debate for a generation.
References
1.
Secure World Foundation. Space Sustainability—A Practical Guide
(Secure World Foundation, 2018).
2.
Williamson, R. A. Assuring the sustainability of space activities.
Space Policy 28, 154–160 (2012).
3.
Newman, C. J. & Williamson, M. Space sustainability: reframing
the debate. Space Policy 46, 30–37 (2018). This paper explains
the concept of space sustainability, and suggests to move its
debate beyond Earth orbit.
4.
Berliner, A. J. et al. Towards a biomanufactory on Mars. Front.
Astron. Space Sci. 8, 1–14 (2021).
5.
Gòdia, F. et al. MELISSA: a loop of interconnected bioreactors to
develop life support in Space. J. Biotechnol. 99, 319–330
(2002).
6.
Keller, R. J. et al. Biologically-based and physiochemical life sup-
port and in situ resource utilization for exploration of the solar
system—reviewing the current state and deﬁning future devel-
opment needs. Life 11, 844 1–41 (2021).
7.
Nangle, S. N. et al. The case for biotech on Mars. Nat. Biotechnol.
38, 401–407 (2020).
8.
Lawrence, A. et al. The case for space environmentalism. Nat.
Astron. 6, 428–435 (2022).
9.
Verseux, C. et al. Sustainable life support on Mars—the potential
roles of cyanobacteria. Int. J. Astrobiol. 15, 65–92 (2016).
10.
Matthews, J. J. & McMahon, S. Exogeoconservation: protecting
geological heritage on celestial bodies. Acta Astronaut. 149,
55–60 (2018).
11.
United Nations Ofﬁce for Outer Space Affairs. Guidelines for the
Long-term Sustainability of Outer Space Activities Conference
Room Paper by the Chair of the Working Group on the Long-term
Sustainability of Outer Space Activities I. Context of the Guide, vol.
V.18-04441 1–20 (Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
2018). This document highlights the roles of space activities in
realizing the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals.
12.
United Nations. The 17 Goals|Sustainable Development https://
sdgs.un.org/goals (2023)
13.
Montague, M. et al. The role of synthetic biology for in situ
resource utilization (ISRU). Astrobiology 12, 1135–1142 (2012).
14.
Castelein, S. M. et al. Iron can be microbially extracted from Lunar
and Martian regolith simulants and 3D printed into tough struc-
tural materials. PLoS ONE 16, 1–21 (2021).
15.
Berliner, A. J. et al. Space bioprocess engineering on the horizon.
Commun. Eng. 1, 13 (2022). A perspective paper highlighting the
need to investigate space bioprocess engineering for future
space missions, identifying key parameters to achieve this.
16.
Averesch, N. J. H. et al. Biomanufacturing for space-exploration—
what to take and when to make. Preprints.Org 1–13 https://doi.org/
10.20944/preprints202207.0329.v1 (2022). A brilliant outline of
strategic approaches to integrate biomanufacturing into space
missions.
17.
Nickerson, C. A., Medina-Colorado, A. A., Barrila, J., Poste, G. & Ott,
C. M. A vision for spaceﬂight microbiology to enable human
health and habitat sustainability. Nat. Microbiol. 7, 471–474
(2022).
18.
Averesch, N. J. H. Choice of microbial system for in-situ resource
utilization on Mars. Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8, 1–7 (2021).
19.
Dallbauman, L. A. & Finn, J. E. Adsorption processes in spacecraft
environmental control and life support systems. Stud. Surf. Sci.
Catal. 120 B, 455–471 (1999).
20.
Vinayak, V. Chapter 20 - Algae as sustainable food in space mis-
sions. In Biomass, Biofuels, Biochemicals: Circular Bioeconomy:
Technologies for Biofuels and Biochemicals (Eds. Varjani, S.,
Pandey, A., Bhaskar, T., Mohan, S. V. & Tsang, D. C. W.)
517–540 (Elsevier, 2022).
21.
International Energy Agency, I. Direct Air Capture A Key Tech-
nology for Net Zero, Vol. 76 (International Energy
Agency, 2022).
22.
Hu, G., Li, Y., Ye, C., Liu, L. & Chen, X. Engineering microorganisms
for enhanced CO2 sequestration. Trends Biotechnol. 37,
532–547 (2019).
23.
Voskian, S. & Hatton, T. A. Faradaic electro-swing reactive
adsorption for CO2 capture. Energy Environ. Sci. 12,
3530–3547 (2019).
24.
Mapstone, L. J., Leite, M. N., Purton, S., Crawford, I. A. & Dartnell, L.
Cyanobacteria and microalgae in supporting human habitation on
Mars. Biotechnol. Adv. 59, 107946 (2022).
25.
Detrell, G. Chlorella vulgaris photobioreactor for oxygen and food
production on a Moon base—potential and challenges. Front.
Astron. Space Sci. 8, 1–10 (2021).
26.
Linne, D. L. et al. Waste management options for long-duration
space missions: when to reject, reuse, or recycle. In Proc. Amer-
ican Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics 7th Symposium on
Space Resource Utilization (Eds. Balasubramaniam, R. & Hegde, U.
G.) 1–9 (AIAA SciTech, 2014).
27.
Schneider, W. F. et al. NASA environmental control and life sup-
port technology development and maturation for exploration:
2019 to 2020 overview. In Proc. 2020 International Conference on
Environmental Systems 1–12 (ICES 2020).
28.
Steinberg, L. M., Kronyak, R. E. & House, C. H. Coupling of anae-
robic waste treatment to produce protein- and lipid-rich bacterial
biomass. Life Sci. Space Res. 15, 32–42 (2017).
29.
Yadav, A. N., Kour, D. & Ahluwalia, A. S. Soil and phytomicro-
biomes for plant growth and soil fertility. Plant Sci. Today 8,
1–5 (2021).
30.
Santos, L. F. & Olivares, F. L. Plant microbiome structure and
beneﬁts for sustainable agriculture. Curr. Plant Biol. 26,
100198 (2021).
31.
Langenfeld, N. J. et al. Optimizing nitrogen ﬁxation and recycling
for food production in regenerative life support systems. Front.
Astron. Space Sci. 8, 1–13 (2021).
32.
Woo, S. L. & Pepe, O. Microbial consortia: promising probiotics as
plant biostimulants for sustainable agriculture. Front. Plant Sci. 9,
7–12 (2018).
33.
Mitter, E. K., Tosi, M., Obregón, D., Dunﬁeld, K. E. & Germida, J. J.
Rethinking crop nutrition in times of modern microbiology: inno-
vative biofertilizer technologies. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 5,
1–23 (2021).
34.
Porto de Souza Vandenberghe, L. et al. Potential applications of
plant probiotic microorganisms in agriculture and forestry. AIMS
Microbiol. 3, 629–648 (2017).
35.
Naseer, I. et al. Biofertilizers for Sustainable Agriculture and
Environment Vol. 55 (Agrobios Indian Publications, 2019).
36.
Monje, O. et al. Hardware validation of the advanced plant habitat
on ISS: canopy photosynthesis in reduced gravity. Front. Plant Sci.
11, 1–15 (2020).
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
8

37.
Zea, L. Drug discovery and development in space. In Proc. 66th
International Astronautical Congress, IAC-15-A1.8.1,x27627
273–282 (IAF, 2015).
38.
Tanaka, H. et al. Improvement in the quality of hematopoietic
prostaglandin D synthase crystals in a microgravity environment.
J. Synchrotron Radiat. 18, 88–91 (2011).
39.
Pathak, Y. V., Araujo dos Santos, M. & Zea, L. Handbook of Space
Pharmaceuticals (Springer, 2020).
40.
Nickerson, C. A., Pellis, N. R. & Ott, C. M. Effect of Spaceﬂight on
Human and Analogue Culture and Spaceﬂight Microbial Cells
(Springer, 2016).
41.
Amselem, S. Remote controlled autonomous microgravity lab
platforms for drug research in space. Pharm. Res. 36, 183 (2019).
42.
Du, B. et al. Evaluation of physical and chemical changes in
pharmaceuticals ﬂown on space missions. AAPS J. 13,
299–308 (2011).
43.
McNulty, M. J. et al. Evaluating the cost of pharmaceutical pur-
iﬁcation for a long-duration space exploration medical foundry.
Front. Microbiol. 12, 1–18 (2021).
44.
Menezes, A. A., Cumbers, J., Hogan, J. A. & Arkin, A. P. Towards
synthetic biological approaches to resource utilization on space
missions. J. R. Soc. Interface 12, 20140715. -20 (2014). This paper
reviews highlights the potential for synthetic biology in human
space exploration and ISRU.
45.
Chen, X., Li, C. & Liu, H. Enhanced recombinant protein produc-
tion under special environmental stress. Front. Microbiol. 12,
1–11 (2021).
46.
Turroni, S. et al. Gut microbiome and space travelers’ health: state
of the art and possible pro/prebiotic strategies for long-term
space missions. Front. Physiol. 11, 1–16 (2020).
47.
Voorhies, A. A. et al. Study of the impact of long-duration space
missions at the International Space Station on the astronaut
microbiome. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–17 (2019).
48.
De Roy, K., Marzorati, M., Van den Abbeele, P., Van de Wiele, T. &
Boon, N. Synthetic microbial ecosystems: an exciting tool to
understand and apply microbial communities. Environ. Microbiol.
16, 1472–1481 (2014).
49.
Menezes, A. A., Montague, M. G., Cumbers, J., Hogan, J. A. &
Arkin, A. P. Grand challenges in space synthetic biology. J. R. Soc.
Interface 12, 20150803 1–7 (2015).
50.
Santomartino, R., Zea, L. & Cockell, C. S. The smallest space
miners: principles of space biomining. Extremophiles 26, 7
1–19 (2022).
51.
Gumulya, Y., Zea, L. & Kaksonen, A. H. In situ resource utilisation:
the potential for space biomining. Miner. Eng. 176, 107288 (2022).
52.
Schippers, A. et al. Biomining: metal recovery from ores with
microorganisms. Geobiotechnology. I. Adv. Biochem. Eng. 141,
1–47 (2013).
53.
Volger, R. et al. Mining Moon & Mars with microbes: biological
approaches to extract iron from Lunar and Martian regolith. Planet.
Space Sci. 184, 104850 (2020).
54.
Cockell, C. S. & Santomartino, R. Mining and microbiology for the
solar system silicate and basalt economy. In Space Manufacturing
Resources: Earth and Planetary Exploration Applications (eds
Hessel, V., Stoudemire, J., Miyamoto, H. & Fisk, I. D.) 163–185
(Wiley, 2022).
55.
Cockell, C. S. et al. Microbially-enhanced vanadium mining and
bioremediation under micro- and Mars gravity on the International
Space Station. Front. Microbiol. 12, 663 (2021).
56.
Cockell, C. S. et al. Space station biomining experiment demon-
strates rare earth element extraction in microgravity and Mars
gravity. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–12 (2020).
57.
Roberto, F. F. & Schippers, A. Progress in bioleaching: part B,
applications of microbial processes by the minerals industries.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 106, 5913–5928 (2022).
58.
Franz, H. B., King, P. L. & Gaillard, F. Chapter 6 - Sulfur on Mars
from the atmosphere to the core. In Volatiles in the Martian Crust
(eds. Filiberto, J. & Schwenzer, S. P.) 119–183 (Elsevier Inc., 2019).
59.
Santomartino, R. et al. No effect of microgravity and simulated
Mars gravity on ﬁnal bacterial cell concentrations on the Interna-
tional Space Station: applications to space bioproduction. Front.
Microbiol. 11, 1–15 (2020).
60.
Castro-Alonso, M. J. et al. Microbially induced calcium carbonate
precipitation (MICP) and its potential in bioconcrete: micro-
biological and molecular concepts. Front. Mater. 6, 1–15 (2019).
61.
Beruto, D. T., Barberis, F. & Botter, R. Calcium carbonate binding
mechanisms in the setting of calcium and calcium–magnesium
putty-limes. J. Cult. Herit. 6, 253–260 (2005).
62.
Okyay, T. O., Nguyen, H. N., Castro, S. L. & Rodrigues, D. F. CO2
sequestration by ureolytic microbial consortia through
microbially-induced calcite precipitation. Sci. Total Environ. 572,
671–680 (2016).
63.
Kang, C. H., Han, S. H., Shin, Y., Oh, S. J. & So, J. S. Bioremediation
of Cd by microbially induced calcite precipitation. Appl. Biochem.
Biotechnol. 172, 1929–1937 (2014).
64.
Huang, Z., Jiang, D., Lu, L. & Ren, Z. J. Ambient CO2 capture and
storage in bioelectrochemically mediated wastewater treatment.
Bioresour. Technol. 215, 380–385 (2016).
65.
Kahre, M. A., Murphy, J. R. & Haberle, R. M. Modelling the Martian
dust cycle and surface dust reservoirs with the NASA Ames gen-
eral circulation model. J. Geophys. Res. Planets 111, 1–25 (2006).
66.
Dikshit, R., Gupta, N., Dey, A., Viswanathan, K. & Kumar, A.
Microbial induced calcite precipitation can consolidate martian
and lunar regolith simulants. PLoS ONE 17, 1–19 (2022).
67.
Liu, Y. et al. Control of lunar and martian dust-experimental
insights from artiﬁcial and natural cyanobacterial and algal crusts
in the desert of Inner Mongolia, China. Astrobiology 8,
75–86 (2008).
68.
Rajasekar, A., Moy, C. K. S. & Wilkinson, S. MICP and advances
towards eco-friendly and economical applications. IOP Conf. Ser.
Earth Environ. Sci. 78, 012016 (IOP Publishing, 2017).
69.
Ganendra, G. et al. Formate oxidation-driven calcium carbonate
precipitation by Methylocystis parvus OBBP. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 80, 4659–4667 (2014).
70.
Attias, N. et al. Mycelium bio-composites in industrial design and
architecture: comparative review and experimental analysis. J.
Clean. Prod. 246, 119037 (2020).
71.
Rothschild, L. J. et al. Myco-architecture off planet: Growing Sur-
face Structures at Destination. NIAC 2018 Phase I Final Report.
2019-08-30T21:35:36+00:00Z (NASA Ames Research Center:
Mountain View, CA, USA, 2018).
72.
Shunk, G. K., Gomez, X. R., Kern, C. & Averesch, N. J. H. Growth of
the radiotrophic fungus Cladosporium sphaerospermum aboard
the International Space Station and effects of ionizing radiation.
bioRxiv 2020.07.16.205534 (2022).
73.
Lovley, D. R. Microbial energizers: fuel cells that keep on going.
Microbe 1, 323–329 (2006).
74.
Hallenbeck, P. C. & Liu, Y. Recent advances in hydrogen produc-
tion by photosynthetic bacteria. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41,
4446–4454 (2016).
75.
Dahiya, S., Chatterjee, S., Sarkar, O. & Mohan, S. V. Renewable
hydrogen production by dark-fermentation: current status, chal-
lenges and perspectives. Bioresour. Technol. 321, 124354
(2021).
76.
Kracke, F., Deutzmann, J. S., Gu, W. & Spormann, A. M. In situ
electrochemical H2 production for efﬁcient and stable power-to-
gas electromethanogenesis. 6194–6203 https://doi.org/10.1039/
d0gc01894e (2020).
77.
Barton, L. L., Tomei-Torres, F. A., Xu, H. & Zocco, T. Chapter 7—
Nanoparticles formed by microbial metabolism of metals and
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
9

minerals. In Nanomicrobiology—Physiological and Environmental
Characteristics (eds Barton, L. L., Bazylinski, D. A. & Xu, H.) 145–176
(Springer, 2014).
78.
Kruyer, N. S., Realff, M. J., Sun, W., Genzale, C. L. & Peralta-Yahya,
P. Designing the bioproduction of Martian rocket resource utili-
zation strategy. Nat. Commun. 12, 1–14 (2021).
79.
Lasseur, C. & Mergeay, M. Current and future ways to closed life
support systems: virtual MELiSSA conference, Ghent (B) (3-5/11/
2020). A review. Ecol. Eng. Environ. Prot. 1, 25–35 (2021). This
review shows results and goals of the ESA MELiSSA project,
which provides an excellent example of a project aiming to
achieve loop-closure in space.
80.
Urbina, J. et al. A new approach to biomining: bioengineering
surfaces for metal recovery from aqueous solutions. Sci. Rep.
9, 1–11 (2019).
81.
Valix, M. Bioleaching of electronic waste: milestones and chal-
lenges. In Current Developments in Biotechnology and Bioengi-
neering: Solid Waste Management (Eds. Wong, J. W. -C., Tyagi, R.
D. & Pandey, A.) 407–442 (Elsevier B.V., 2017).
82.
Srichandan, H., Mohapatra, R. K., Parhi, P. K. & Mishra, S. Bio-
leaching approach for extraction of metal values from secondary
solid wastes: a critical review. Hydrometallurgy 189, 105122
(2019).
83.
Shah, A. A., Hasan, F., Hameed, A. & Ahmed, S. Biological degra-
dation of plastics: a comprehensive review. Biotechnol. Adv. 26,
246–265 (2008).
84.
Tiso, T. et al. The metabolic potential of plastics as biotechnolo-
gical carbon sources—review and targets for the future. Metab.
Eng. 71, 77–98 (2022).
85.
Sadler, J. C. & Wallace, S. Microbial synthesis of vanillin from
waste poly(ethylene terephthalate). Green Chem. 23,4661
1–8 (2021).
86.
Billi, D., Gallego Fernandez, B., Fagliarone, C., Chiavarini, S. &
Rothschild, L. J. Exploiting a perchlorate-tolerant desert cyano-
bacterium to support bacterial growth for in situ resource utiliza-
tion on Mars. Int. J. Astrobiol. 20, 29–35 (2021).
87.
Duri, L. G. et al. The potential for Lunar and Martian Regolith
simulants to sustain plant growth: a multidisciplinary overview.
Front. Astron. Space Sci. 8, 1–16 (2022).
88.
Lehner, B. et al. Bacterial modiﬁcation of Lunar And Martian
Regolith for plant growth in life support systems. In Proc. 69th
International Astronautical Congress, IAC-18,A1,7,7,x42645 1–7
(IAF, 2018).
89.
Paul, A. L., Elardo, S. M. & Ferl, R. Plants grown in Apollo lunar
regolith present stress-associated transcriptomes that inform
prospects for lunar exploration. Commun. Biol. 5, 1–9
(2022).
90.
Leitão, A. L. Potential of Penicillium species in the bioremediation
ﬁeld. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 6, 1393–1417
(2009).
91.
Matsumura, Y., Akahira-Moriya, A. & Sasaki-Mori, M. Bioremedia-
tion of bisphenol-a polluted soil by Sphingomonas bisphenolicum
ao1 and the microbial community existing in the soil. Biocontrol
Sci. 20, 35–42 (2015).
92.
Prakash, D., Gabani, P., Chandel, A. K., Ronen, Z. & Singh, O. V.
Bioremediation: a genuine technology to remediate radionuclides
from the environment. Microb. Biotechnol. 6, 349–360
(2013).
93.
Horneck, G., Klaus, D. M. & Mancinelli, R. L. Space microbiology.
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 74, 121–156 (2010). An essential review
explaining the principles of space microbiology, including the
conditions that affects microbial behaviour in space and their
effects.
94.
Zea, L. et al. Experiment veriﬁcation test of the Artemis I ‘Deep
Space Radiation Genomics’ experiment. Acta Astronaut. 198,
702–706 (2022).
95.
NASA Interim Directive. Subject: Biological Planetary Protection for
Human Missions to Mars 1–6 (NASA Interim Directive, 2020).
96.
Fahrion, J., Mastroleo, F., Dussap, C. G. & Leys, N. Use of photo-
bioreactors in regenerative life support systems for human space
exploration. Front. Microbiol. 12, 1–14 (2021).
97.
Cockell, C. S. Bridging the gap between microbial limits and
extremes in space: space microbial biotechnology in the next 15
years. Microb. Biotechnol. 15, 29–41 2021.
98.
Yang, J. et al. Microbiology of the built environment in spacecraft
used for human ﬂight. In Methods in Microbiology Vol. 45 (Eds.
Gurtler, V. & Trevors, J. T.) 3–26, (Elsevier Ltd., 2018).
99.
Zea, L., Santa Maria, S. R. & Ricco, A. J. CubeSats for microbiology
and astrobiology research. In Cubesat Handbook (Eds. Cappelleti,
C. & Battistini, S.) 147–162 (Elsevier Inc., 2021).
100. Zea, L. et al. Potential bioﬁlm control strategies for extended
spaceﬂight missions. Bioﬁlm 2, 100026 1–20 (2020).
101.
I. S. E. C. G. Beneﬁts Stemming from Space Exploration 1–22 (ESA
Publication, 2013).
102.
European Space Agency. Circular Economy|ESA Business Appli-
cations https://business.esa.int/funding/invitation-to-tender/
circular-economy (2021)
103.
Schlieder, S. NASA Orbital Alchemy Challenge|NASA https://
www.nasa.gov/orbital-alchemy-challenge (2022)
104.
ISS National Laboratories. ISS National Lab Sustainability Chal-
lenge: Beyond Plastics https://www.issnationallab.org/research-
on-the-iss/2022sustainabilitychallenge/ (2022)
Acknowledgements
Publication fees were covered by the United Kingdom Science and
Technology Facilities Council under grant ST/V000586/1. We are
thankful to Devanshu Jha, who contributed to the white paper for the
NASEM Decadal Survey on Biological and Physical Sciences Research in
Space 2023–2032, which inﬂuenced this work.
Author contributions
R.S. conceived the paper’s topic and coordinated the author’s team. L.Z.
gathered the authors’ team and coordinated the ﬁrst version of the
manuscript. The author’s names, except for R.S. and L.Z., have been
listed in alphabetical order and contributed equally to the manuscript.
R.S., L.Z., S.M., B.L., and Y.G. conceptualised the ﬁgures in this paper,
and S.M. produced them. All authors listed have made a substantial,
direct, and intellectual contribution to speciﬁc sections of the work and
approved it for publication.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Rosa Santomartino or Luis Zea.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Mary Dunlop,
Amor Menezes and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their con-
tribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
10

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Perspective
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37070-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1391 
11
