Citation: Çelen, ˙I.; Jayasinghe, A.;
Doh, J.H.; Sabanayagam, C.R.
Transcriptomic Signature of the
Simulated Microgravity Response in
Caenorhabditis elegans and Comparison
to Spaceflight Experiments. Cells 2023,
12, 270. https://doi.org/10.3390/
cells12020270
Academic Editor: Mariano Bizzarri
Received: 29 November 2022
Revised: 25 December 2022
Accepted: 28 December 2022
Published: 10 January 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
cells
Article
Transcriptomic Signature of the Simulated Microgravity
Response in Caenorhabditis elegans and Comparison to
Spaceﬂight Experiments
˙Irem Çelen 1,2, Aroshan Jayasinghe 2, Jung H. Doh 2 and Chandran R. Sabanayagam 2,*
1
Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19711, USA
2
Delaware Biotechnology Institute, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19711, USA
*
Correspondence: chandran@udel.edu
Abstract: Given the growing interest in human exploration of space, it is crucial to identify the
effects of space conditions on biological processes. Here, we analyze the transcriptomic response
of Caenorhabditis elegans to simulated microgravity and observe the maintained transcriptomic re-
sponse after returning to ground conditions for four, eight, and twelve days. We show that 75% of
the simulated microgravity-induced changes on gene expression persist after returning to ground
conditions for four days while most of these changes are reverted after twelve days. Our results from
integrative RNA-seq and mass spectrometry analyses suggest that simulated microgravity affects
longevity-regulating insulin/IGF-1 and sphingolipid signaling pathways. Finally, we identiﬁed
118 genes that are commonly differentially expressed in simulated microgravity- and space-exposed
worms. Overall, this work provides insight into the effect of microgravity on biological systems
during and after exposure.
Keywords: ceramide; sphinogolipid signaling; longevity; transcriptome; space; intergenerational;
microgravity
1. Introduction
Signiﬁcant efforts are being made for the human exploration of space. It is known that
space conditions can negatively affect biological processes by causing bone loss, muscle
atrophy, and immune system impairment, to name a few examples (reviewed in [1,2]).
However, the underlying molecular mechanisms that contribute to these adverse effects is
largely unknown.
Microgravity is one of the major stress factors causing detrimental health effects on
humans (reviewed in [3]). Simulation of microgravity is a cost-effective way to study the
impact of microgravity on biological systems. For this purpose, various platforms including
drop towers, parabolic ﬂights and space ﬂights are available. Because of their advantages
to enable long term simulations in an effective and economical manner, clinostats are
widely preferred to study gravitational response in biological systems, mainly plants,
for decades [4–8]. Clinostats rotate a sample around a horizontal axis, thereby exposing
the sample to a rotating gravitational vector. This can reduce and even possibly remove
gravitational bias in the development of an organism [6,9–13].
C. elegans is an exceptional model organism for space biology studies [14] with its com-
pletely documented cell lineage, high reproduction rate, short lifespan, and high similarity
to the human genome (reviewed in [15]). The usage of this organism in previous space
missions (such as International C. elegans Experiment in Space (ICE-First), C. elegans RNAi
space experiment (CERISE), Shenzhou-8, and Commercial Generic Bioprocessing Appara-
tus Science Insert-01 (CSI-01)) have provided valuable insights into the biological response
of C. elegans to space conditions [16–24]. However, these studies generally have utilized
different strains and liquid cultures instead of commonly used OP50-seeded agar plates
Cells 2023, 12, 270. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12020270
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cells

Cells 2023, 12, 270
2 of 16
to reduce the impact of surface tension [25]. We previously have shown that the usage of
different liquid cultures and strains cause highly distinct intergenerational transcriptomic
and phenotypical responses [26]. Similarly, a recent study reported dramatical intergen-
erational changes in the physiology of liquid-grown worms [27]. Thus, complementary
to the spaceﬂight studies, separate investigations can provide insight into the impact of
individual space conditions on biological processes.
This study investigates the effect of simulated microgravity and the sustained im-
pacts after return to ground conditions on C. elegans transcriptome. Through the RNA-
sequencing (RNA-seq) and mass spectrometry analyses, we reveal the downregulation of
the sphingolipid signaling pathway under simulated microgravity. In addition, we identify
a putative microgravity-responsive transcriptomic signature by comparing our results with
previous studies.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. C. elegans Strain and Growth Conditions
Wild-type N2 strain was obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC). The
worms were grown at 21 ◦C. Stocks of C. elegans were acclimated to CeHR medium for
three weeks prior to microgravity experiments. The ground control animals were maintained
in CeHR medium in 20 mL scintillation vials as described [26]. Approximately 100,000 live
worms (P0 generation) were cleaned by sucrose floatation, their embryos (F1 generation) were
harvested by bleaching and placed in ~40 mL of CeHR culture in sterile VueLife culture bags
(“AC” Series 32-C, Saint-Gobain). Supplementary Videos S1 and S2 show some of the worms
in the VueLife culture bags. Culture bags were mounted in the clinostat and rotated at 1
rad/s (~10 RPM) for four days, which is the measured time to reach L4/adulthood [28].
The “F2” and subsequent generations were approximated by using four-day intervals. Prior
to RNA extraction, only live worms are retrieved using the sucrose ﬂoatation method. We
note that “F2” generation and beyond will not maintain synchronicity, and all will contain
a mixture of generations, but recovering only the live animals enriches the RNA pool for
the expected (majority) generation as each adult will produce ~30 offspring. The reason for
the usage of mixed stage worms were the difﬁculties experienced (e.g., contamination of
the liquid medium) during the synchronizing of the animals.
2.2. RNA Isolation, Illumina Sequencing
Wild-type N2 strain was obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (University
of Minnesota, Twin Cities, MN, USA). The worms were grown at 21 ◦C. Stocks of C. elegans
were acclimated to CeHR medium for three weeks prior to microgravity experiments.
Approximately 100,000 live worms (P0 generation) were cleaned by sucrose ﬂoatation,
their embryos (F1 generation) were harvested by bleaching and placed in ~40 mL of CeHR
medium in sterile VueLife culture bags (“AC” Series 32-C, Saint-Gobain, La Défense Cedex,
France). Four culture bags were mounted in a lab-built clinostat inside a laminar ﬂow
biosafety hood, and one was kept aside as a ground control. The clinostat rotated the
culture bags at 1 rad/s (~10 RPM) for four days, which is the measured time to reach
L4/adulthood at 21 ◦C in CeHR medium [28]. Worms from one bag were immediately
harvested to represent simulated microgravity conditions. The remaining three culture
bags were processed in four-day intervals to represent the return to ground conditions. We
note that F2 generation and beyond will not maintain synchronicity, and all will contain a
mixture of generations, but recovering only the live animals enriches the RNA pool for the
expected (majority) generation as each adult will produce ~30 offspring in CeHR culture.
The experimental scheme is limited to using mixed stage worms because of the technical
difﬁculties associated with manually picking the desired age (swimming) worms from
liquid cultures. Live worms were selected for harvesting by sucrose ﬂoatation and total
RNA was isolated with TRIzol treatment and recovered by alcohol precipitation. Total
RNA was further puriﬁed by PureLink ™RNA Mini Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). Two micrograms of total RNA were used for library preparations using the TruSeq

Cells 2023, 12, 270
3 of 16
Stranded mRNA LT Sample Prep Kit (Illumina). Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina
HiSeq 2500 instrument set to the rapid run mode using single-end, 1 × 51 cycle sequencing
reads as per manufacturer’s instructions. RNA-seq was performed for each condition with
three replicates.
2.3. Gene Expression Analysis
Quality control on the RNA-seq data was done with FASTQC (version 0.11.2) [29]. All
the reads were in the “very good” quality range. The DEGs were identiﬁed by using two
separate approaches. First, the Tuxedo pipeline [30] were used with default parameters.
Second, the DESeq2 software (version 1.16.1) [31] was utilized after quantifying the ex-
pression of transcripts with Salmon (version 0.8.2) [32]. The reference genome (WBCel235)
along with the annotation ﬁle were retrieved from Ensembl [33]. We considered genes as
differentially expressed if FDR adjusted p-values < 0.05, and log2 fold change > 2 unless
otherwise stated. The results from the Tuxedo pipeline were used throughout the paper
as explained in the results and the results from DESeq2 were reported in the supplemen-
tary data (Supplementary Figure S4; Supplementary Table S5). We discarded miRNA,
piRNA, and rRNA molecules from the analysis. The ncRNA molecules (WS250) and uncon-
ﬁrmed genes were obtained from WormBase [34]. Dendrogram was generated with Ward’s
clustering criterion by using R software (version 3.5.1).
2.4. Functional Analysis of the Genes
Gene ontology (GO) enrichment for biological processes and protein domains were
assessed with Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID)
(v6.8) [35]. The GO network for the common DEGs between our simulated microgravity
experiment and four-day CERISE was created in Cytoscape (version 3.4.0) [36] by using the
BINGO plugin [37]. Pathway analysis was done using KEGG Mapper (https://www.genome.
jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway1.html (accessed on 1 January 2019)). Tissue enrichment analysis
was performed by using WormBase Gene Set Enrichment Analysis tool [38], and FDR adj.
p-value < 0.05 considered significant and top ten tissues were reported.
2.5. Comparison of DEGs to the CERISE Four Days
NASA’s GeneLab (https://genelab.nasa.gov/ (accessed on 1 January 2019)) platform
was used to acquire the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) accession number for the previous
studies on microgravity related gene expressions in C. elegans. We identiﬁed four such
studies with the following GEO accession numbers: GSE71771 (Expression Data from
International C. elegans Experiment 1st), GSE71770 (four-day CERISE), GSE27338 (eight-day
CERISE), and GSE32949 by UKM (PRJNA146465) from the query made on 30 June 2016
with “C. elegans” and “microgravity” terms on GeneLab. We used data from only four-day
CERISE as the duration of the study is the same with ours. We analyzed the publicly
available microarray datasets with GEO2R (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/
(accessed on 1 January 2019)) for gene expression under microgravity at the ISS versus
1G control in four day CERISE. The genes with logFC > 2 and Benjamini and Hochberg
corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed.
STRING database (version 10.5) [39] was used to determine whether the common
DEGs from our simulated microgravity experiment and four-day CERISE show enrich-
ment for protein–protein interactions (PPI). We only considered the interactions only from
experiments, gene-fusion, databases, and co-expression and selected “high-conﬁdence
(0.7)” results. We excluded the interactions based on text-mining, fusion, neighborhood,
and co-occurrence as we were only interested in PPI with higher experimental and/or
computational conﬁdence. PPI enrichment showed signiﬁcance at p-value < 1.0 × 10−16
with 58 interacting nodes and 155 edges. The PPI network was visualized with Cytoscape
(version 3.4.0) [36]. Edge width was determined based on the “combined score” for the
interactions obtained from the STRING database. We identiﬁed the human orthologs of

Cells 2023, 12, 270
4 of 16
the common DEGs in our experiment and four-day CERISE with OrthoList 2 with default
settings [40].
2.6. Mass Spectrometry for Ceramides
The worms were chopped manually with razor blades on ice-cold glass. Three repli-
cates from mixed stage worms grown in ground control and simulated microgravity
conditions were used simultaneously. Each sample was sent to Avanti Polar Lipids Analyti-
cal Services as a frozen extract in glass tubes for liquid chromatography with tandem mass
spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) experiment for detection of Ceramide levels. Each sample
was extracted by modiﬁed Bligh and Dyer extraction [41]. The samples were dried and
resuspended in 50:50 Chloroform:Methanol and diluted prior to analysis. The resolved
sample was used for analyses and stored at −20 ◦C until assayed. Samples were diluted
as needed for analysis with internal standards for Ceramides for quantization by injec-
tion on LC/MS/MS. The individual molecular species for each sphingolipid group were
measured by reversed phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry methods
which separate the compounds by multiple reaction monitoring m/z to fragments and
retention time. Quantiﬁcation was performed by ratio of analyte to internal standard
response multiplied by ISTD concentration and m/z response correction factor. The results
are expressed as ng/rnl. The consistency among the replicates were examined with Pear-
son correlation. All but one replicates in both the experiments showed high correlation
(R2 > 0.9). The ground control replicate which did not show a strong correlation (around
60%) with the other replicates was excluded from the analysis. The data were analyzed
with t-test (two-tailed), and p-value < 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant. Equal variances were
conﬁrmed with Levene’s test at α = 0.05 for all the ceramides tested.
2.7. Microgravity Simulation with Clinorotation
We used a laboratory-built clinostat with an integrated microscope to observe the
motion of small objects including microspheres, yeast cells, and C. elegans embryos during
clinorotation. The trajectory of a spherical particle in a rotating vessel has been described
previously in literature [5,11,42,43]. Dedolph and Dipert (1971) separated the motion of a
spherical particle into two parts: a circular motion under the inﬂuence of gravity, the radius
of which is inversely proportional to the angular velocity (ω, rad/s), and a radial motion
due to centrifugal forces, the velocity of which is proportional to ω2 [42]. The equation of
motion that describes the orbital trajectories is given by:
m d2q
dx2 + (2iωm + λ)dq
dt −ω2(m −mw)q = −ig(m −mw)e−iωt.
In the above equation, λ is the viscous drag coefﬁcient, m is the mass of the object, mw
is the mass of the displaced water, t is time, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and q(x,y,z,t)
is the rotating reference frame deﬁned as:
q ≡xrot + iyrot = ze−iωt.
As a test of the performance of the clinostat we recorded the motion of ﬂuorescent
melamine-formaldehyde microspheres (5.6 µm diameter, 1.51 g/cm3 density; Corpuscular
Inc., Cold Harbor, NY, USA) suspended in a 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution
(Supplementary Video S3). This solution was injected into an 8 mm diameter, 100-µm deep,
coverglass topped chamber mounted on the clinostat microscope. Some of the melamine
microspheres adhere to coverglass of the chamber, conveniently providing ﬁducial markers
which we were able to use to compensate for the mechanical noise introduced into the
micrographs by the rotation of the clinostat. We measured the terminal velocity of the
suspended microspheres to be 3.2 ± 0.2 µm/s (mean ± SEM, n = 8). Figure S6 shows a
plot of the measured radius of circular motion of suspended microspheres as a function
of inverse angular velocity (black dots), and the calculated radius [5] using the measured

Cells 2023, 12, 270
5 of 16
mean terminal velocity (blue line). The shaded area encompasses calculated radii for
terminal velocities within one standard deviation of the mean.
3. Results
To dissect the biological processes affected under simulated microgravity and sus-
tained after the exposure, we first cultured C. elegans in CeHR for three weeks on ground
control condition and allowed the worms to acclimate to the liquid culture. Then,
we exposed the worms to clinostat-simulated microgravity for four days (Figure 1a;
Supplementary Video S1) and observed the maintained impacts at four, eight, and twelve
days after placing the worms back to ground conditions (Figure 1b). RNA-seq was per-
formed for each condition with three replicates (Supplementary Table S1). Because RNA-seq
can detect low abundance transcripts and achieve less noise in the data, unlike previous
space biology studies on C. elegans, we preferred RNA-seq over microarray [44].
 
Figure 1. Transcriptomic response of C. elegans to simulated microgravity and return to ground
conditions. (a) Clinostat used for simulating microgravity. (b) Experimental design for the effect of
simulated microgravity on gene expressions during the exposure and after the return. (c) Dendrogram
of the gene expression proﬁles for ground condition (GC), simulated microgravity (MG), four days
after return to ground conditions (R1_GC), eight days after return to ground conditions (R2_GC), and
twelve days after return to ground conditions (R3_GC). (d) Log2 fold change of the gene expressions
(FPKM) between the conditions.
We generated a dendrogram for the transcriptomic proﬁle in each condition tested
and found signiﬁcant differences during and after exposure to simulate microgravity
compared to the ground control conditions (Figure 1c). Thus, this result suggests that
exposure to simulated gravity induces highly distinct gene expression patterns which are
maintained even after 12 days return to ground conditions (approximately three generations
of C. elegans in axenic medium [28]).
3.1. Simulated Microgravity Triggers Differential Expression of Hundreds of Genes
To identify the genes with the most distinctive expression levels after the exposure,
we determined the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the simulated microgravity-
exposed and returned worms against the ground control. The genes with over two-fold
log2 expression difference with the FDR-adjusted p-value ≤0.05 were considered as DEGs.
Hundreds of genes demonstrated differential expression during exposure to simulated

Cells 2023, 12, 270
6 of 16
microgravity and up to eight days after return to ground conditions (Figure 1d). Twelve
days after the return, the gene expression levels started to resemble the ones in the ground
control with only 91 upregulated and 13 downregulated genes.
The spatial expression of the DEGs is of great importance to identify the potentially
affected tissues. Thus, we performed tissue enrichment analysis for the DEGs in simulated
microgravity (Figure 2a). The downregulated genes were overrepresented in neuronal
and epithelial tissues, and intestine while the upregulated genes were enriched in the
reproductive system-related tissues.
Figure 2. Differentially expressed gene proﬁles under simulated microgravity and after return to
ground conditions. (a) Tissue enrichment of the upregulated (green) and downregulated (red) genes
under simulated microgravity. (b) Pathway enrichment of the upregulated (green) and downreg-
ulated (red) genes during the exposure to simulated microgravity (MG), and four and eight days
after return to ground conditions (R1 GC and R2 GC, respectively). (c) The number of differentially
expressed genes under simulated microgravity and the transmission of the differential expression
after return to ground conditions. (d) Categorization of the upregulated genes in comparison to the
ground control animals, and the enriched gene ontology terms assigned to them. (e) Categorization
of the downregulated genes in comparison to the ground control animals, and the enriched gene
ontology terms assigned to them.
Next, we conducted pathway enrichment analysis for the DEGs in simulated micro-
gravity and return to ground conditions to identify the altered pathways and whether they
remained altered after return to ground conditions (Figure 2b). Our results suggested an
upregulation of dorso–ventral axis formation and downregulation of lysosome during the
exposure, and these expression patterns were maintained for four and eight days after the
return, respectively.
3.2. Simulated Microgravity-Induced Gene Expression Differences Are Highly Maintained for
Eight Days after Return to Ground Conditions
We identiﬁed the number of simulated microgravity-induced DEGs that preserved
their expression patterns after the return to ground control (Figure 2c). The majority of
the DEGs (approximately 75%) from the exposed animals maintained their expression
patterns after the return for four days. The shared number of DEGs decreased drastically at
12 days after the return to ground conditions: 16% for commonly upregulated and <1%
downregulated genes with the exposed animals.
To elucidate the genes showing altered expression under simulated micrograv-
ity and maintaining these expression patterns after return to ground conditions for

Cells 2023, 12, 270
7 of 16
short (four days) and long-term (12 days), we categorized the DEGs in Venn diagrams
(Figure 2d,e; Supplementary Table S2). The genes solely upregulated in the simulated micro-
gravity exposed animals did not exhibit enrichment for any gene ontology (GO) term. The
genes upregulated during the exposure and four days after the return, however, showed
an overrepresentation for reproduction-related processes (Figure 2d). Chitin metabolic
process-related genes were induced at four days after return to ground conditions, and the
expression proﬁles were conserved for eight days after the return.
We found that the downregulated genes were enriched for the biological processes
which are affected in space conditions. In particular, genes functioning in body morphology,
collagen and cuticulin-based cuticle development, defense response, and locomotion were
downregulated under simulated microgravity and up to eight days after return to ground
conditions (Figure 2e). In simulated microgravity and spaceﬂight studies, both small
movement defects [18] and no difference in locomotory behavior [19,45] have been noted.
The reason behind these discrepancies is unclear, but our results indicated differences
in the expression of the locomotion genes in close to weightless environment. Similarly,
neuropeptide signaling pathway genes (ﬂp-22, ﬂp-8, ﬂp-26, nlp-10, nlp-12, nlp-17, nlp-20,
nlp-24, nlp-25, nlp-26, nlp-39, nlp-33, nlp-28, nlp-29, nlp-30, and ﬂp-24) were downregulated
during the exposure, and this expression proﬁle was lost after return to ground conditions
(Figure 2e). These neuropeptide signaling pathway genes also exhibit enrichment for
movement variant phenotypes (Supplementary Figure S1) indicating altered locomotion in
response to simulated microgravity.
During spaceﬂight, the neuromuscular system and collagen are negatively affected [18].
In agreement with these ﬁndings, collagen genes were downregulated in our experiment
during the exposure, and the downregulation was sustained for eight days after return to
ground conditions. Previously, Higashibata et al. (2006) reported decreased expression for
the myogenic transcription factors and myosin heavy chains in space-ﬂown worms [18]. We
did not observe differential expression for these muscle-related genes. Since their reported
ﬂight to ground gene expression ratio for the downregulated genes was less than one,
and we only consider the genes with the log2 ratio greater than two as DEG, we did not
expect to observe those genes in our group of DEGs. To test whether other muscle-related
genes are differentially expressed under simulated microgravity, we compared our DEGs
to 287 genes reported in WormBase for involvement in muscle system morphology variant
or any of its transitive descendant terms via RNAi or variation. Only T14A8.2, col-103,
and sqt-3 among the 287 genes showed downregulation under simulated microgravity
(hypergeometric test, p-value = 0.99). Thus, our results did not suggest a signiﬁcant change
in the expression of the genes known to function in muscle morphology.
In our previous work, we revealed that the expression of many ncRNA molecules is
triggered in response to environmental changes [26]. To identify whether a similar pattern
occurs under simulated microgravity, we determined the expressed ncRNA molecules in
ground control, simulated microgravity, and return. Since the housekeeping gene pmp-3
presents consistent expression patterns both in our study and previous studies [26], we
considered its minimum expression level (FPKM = 24.7) in our experiment as the cutoff for
the expression of ncRNA molecules. The number of expressed ncRNA molecules slightly
decreased in response to simulated microgravity (Supplementary Figure S2A). Interest-
ingly, this number increased on the eighth day of return. We found that the expression of
126 ncRNA molecules is induced during simulated microgravity exposure and for 12 days
after the return (Supplementary Figure S2B) while the expression of 16 ncRNA molecules
is lost during and after simulated microgravity (Supplementary Figure S2C). Among the
classiﬁed ncRNA molecules, mostly small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) and long noncod-
ing RNA (lincRNA) molecules were induced while other sets of snoRNA and antisense
RNA (asRNA) molecules lost expression in simulated microgravity. For instance, asRNA
molecules anr-33, K12G11.14, and ZK822.8 are induced whereas anr-2, anr-9, and Y49A3A.6
are silenced during and 12 days after the exposure.

Cells 2023, 12, 270
8 of 16
We next sought to identify the putative transcriptional regulators (i.e., transcription fac-
tors) of the simulated microgravity-induced genes and whether these regulators maintain
their impact after return to ground conditions. That is, we determined the putative tran-
scription factor (TF) genes [46] that are upregulated under simulated microgravity and after
the return to ground conditions. Our results have revealed that 20 TF genes are upregulated
during the exposure and 90%, 75%, and 15% of these genes maintained their upregulation
after the return for four, eight, and twelve days, respectively (Supplementary Figure S3).
These TFs play a role in a variety of mechanisms such as double strain break repair or sex
determination. For example, tbx-43 is upregulated during the exposure and for at least
12 days after the return to ground. The best human BLASTP-match of tbx-43 in WormBase,
TBR, functions in developmental processes and is required for normal brain development
(E-value = 3 × 10−33; identity = 68.5%). However, many of the upregulated TFs do not have
a known function. Hence, our list of simulated microgravity-induced TF gene expressions
can be a rich source for the discovery of the microgravity-related transcriptional regulators.
3.3. Longevity Regulating Pathways Are Affected under Simulated Microgravity
Spaceflight affects the mechanisms involved in delayed aging in worms.
For in-
stance, Honda et al., found that age-dependent increase in 35-glutamine repeat aggrega-
tion is suppressed and seven longevity-controlling genes are differentially expressed in
spaceflight [20,24]. To examine whether simulated microgravity induces such changes, we
mapped the DEGs (simulated microgravity versus ground control) to longevity regulating
pathways in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). We used a less strin-
gent criterion for differential expression by including the genes with log2(FPKM) > 1.5 in this
analysis. We determined 11 DEGs in the longevity regulating pathway genes most of which
are involved in the insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling pathway (insulin/IGF-1)
(Figure 3). Interestingly, the transcription factor DAF-16 gene did not exhibit differential ex-
pression unlike its targets sod-3, lips-17, and ctl-1. Because the translocation of DAF-16 into
the nucleus activates or represses target genes functioning in longevity, metabolism, and
stress response, this ﬁnding was unexpected [47–50]. The nuclear localization of DAF-16 is
antagonized by transcription factor PQM-1 [51], and thus an upregulation in pqm-1 may in-
dicate inhibition of DAF-16 translocation. Our data, however, did not present a differential
expression for pqm-1 and thus it does not suggest inhibition of the DAF-16 translocation.
It is possible that the DAF-16 targets are differentially expressed due to the translocation
state of DAF-16 or involvement of other factors (e.g., other transcriptional regulators).
The upregulation of the longevity regulating pathway transcriptional targets generally
contributes to increased lifespan. Since many of these targets were downregulated under
simulated microgravity, we sought to identify the potential impact of their downregulation by
acquiring their RNAi phenotype from WormBase [34]. Lifespan variants (WBRNAi00063155
and WBRNAi00063156) for hsp-12.6 and extended lifespan (WBRNAi00064044) for sod-3 have
been reported. Follow-up experiments are needed to fully understand the role of these genes
in the longevity regulation under simulated microgravity.
To further investigate the involvement of the longevity genes in simulated microgravity,
we compared the DEGs to the DAF-16-responsive genes [51]. We found 144 DAF-16-induced
genes were downregulated and this overlap was statistically significant (hypergeometric test,
p-value < 0.0001). The number of shared genes between the simulated microgravity-induced
genes and the genes induced or repressed by DAF-16 are 11 and 35, respectively (hypergeomet-
ric test, p-value > 0.05 for both). Similarly, the number of downregulated DAF-16-repressed
genes were insignificant with a total of 57 shared genes (hypergeometric test, p-value > 0.05)
(Supplementary Table S3). Together, our results suggest that the longevity regulation genes
are affected under simulated microgravity and that along with the DAF-16-regulation, other
mechanisms have an important function in this process.

Cells 2023, 12, 270
9 of 16
 
Figure 3. Longevity regulating pathway genes are differentially expressed under simulated micro-
gravity. Adopted from the KEGG longevity regulating pathway—worm (cel04212).
3.4. Sphingolipid Signaling Pathway Is Suppressed in Response to Simulated Microgravity
Previous studies have suggested that the sphingolipid signaling pathway plays a role
in the expression of DAF-16/FOXO-regulated genes [52,53]. In line with this, our results
showed that the sphingolipid signaling pathway is downregulated under simulated micro-
gravity. That is, putative glucosylceramidase 4 gene (gba-4) and putative sphingomyelin
phosphodiesterase asm-3 are downregulated and these downregulation patterns were sus-
tained for eight days after return to ground conditions (Figure 4a). This downregulation
pattern indicates an attenuation in the ceramide levels through a potential decrease in the
degradation of sphingomyelin and glucosylceramide to ceramide. Along with the other bi-
ological functions such as autophagy, senescence, and apoptosis, the sphingolipid signaling
pathway has critical functions in aging and longevity regulation [52,54,55]. The inhibition
of this conserved pathway results in an extension of lifespan in animals from worms to
humans [54,55]. For example, the inactivation of asm-3 in C. elegans causes translocation of
DAF-16 into the nucleus, promotion of DAF-16 target gene expression, and extension of
lifespan by 14–19% [53].
To validate that the ceramide and sphingosine levels are indeed decreased in re-
sponse to the aforementioned gene downregulation, we performed mass spectrometry
analysis in ground control and simulated microgravity-exposed worms concurrently
(Supplementary Table S4; Figure 4b,c). Our results revealed that total ceramide, total hexo-
sylceramide (HexCer), and d18:1 sphingosine are lower (1.5-, 3.6-, and 1.4-fold, respectively)
under simulated microgravity (t-test, p-value < 0.05). Similarly, sphingoid base (SB) levels
decreased 1.9-fold under simulated microgravity, but this decrease was not signiﬁcant
(t-test, p-value = 0.055) (Figure 4b). Interestingly, the levels of total lactosylceramide (Lac-
Cer) increased 27-fold (t-test, p-value < 0.05). Increase in the LacCer and HexCer levels
have been determined as biomarkers of aging in humans and murine [56] while LacCer
C18:1 was unaffected during aging in C. elegans [54]. It is unclear why LacCer levels
are elevated when the HexCer levels are decreased, but the overall pattern indicates a
downregulation in the sphingolipid signaling pathway under simulated microgravity.
The levels of long acyl-chain ceramides (≥C24) are elevated with advancing age and
in age-related diseases such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease while C20 and C26 ce-
ramides are unaffected with aging or developmental stage in C. elegans [54,57,58]. To further
decipher the potential effect of simulated microgravity on aging-related mechanisms, we
quantified the levels of different acyl-chain ceramides (Supplementary Table S4; Figure 4c). We

Cells 2023, 12, 270
10 of 16
observed a decrease in d18:1-C24, and d18:1-C24:1 ceramides (1.2-, and 3.2-fold, respectively)
under simulated microgravity (t-test, p-value < 0.05). It has been found that the inhibition of
C24–C26 ceramide-inducing ceramide synthase HYL-1 causes improvements in neuromuscu-
lar function and age-dependent hypoxia and stress response [59,60]. Hence, the lower levels
of C24 and C24:1 ceramides in the simulated microgravity-exposed worms may indicate their
positive impact on the stress response and aging of the worms.
Figure 4. Sphingolipid signaling pathway is downregulated under simulated microgravity. (a) The
sphingolipid signaling pathway genes asah-1, asm-3, and gba-4 are downregulated under simulated
microgravity. The downregulation pattern of asm-3 and gba-4 is maintained for eight days after return
to ground conditions. (b) The levels of d18:1 sphingosine, total ceramide, hexosylceramide, and
sphingoid base reduced while total lactosylceramide level increased under simulated microgravity.
(c) The levels of different acyl-chain ceramides show alterations under simulated microgravity. The
error bars represent the standard error of the mean (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001).
Along with their roles in aging and longevity, different acyl-chain ceramides have
other distinctive functions. For example, C16-ceramide induces germ cell apoptosis [61]
and C20–C22 ceramide functions in resistance to hypoxia [60]. We determined that ce-
ramides with different acyl-chain showed altered levels in response to simulated micrograv-
ity. While d18:1-C16 and d18:1-C18 exhibited a decrease (2.8- and 1.6-fold, respectively),
d18:1-C20 and d18:1-C22 ceramides exhibited an increase (3.7- and 1.5-fold, respectively)
under simulated microgravity (t-test, p-value < 0.05). Collectively, our ﬁndings suggest that
sphingolipid and insulin/IGF-1 pathways play a role in simulated microgravity response.
3.5. Identiﬁcation of the Common Microgravity-Responsive Genes between Four-Day CERISE and
Simulated Microgravity
To investigate the microgravity-responsive genes, we compared the results from our
simulated microgravity experiment to those from four-day CERISE spaceﬂight experiment
on C. elegans reported in NASA’s GeneLab database (https://genelab.nasa.gov/ (accessed
on 1 January 2019)). For this analysis, we used GEO2R to determine the microarray DEGs
(|log2 fold change (logFC)| > 2 and FDR < 0.05). We reasoned that the genes that are
commonly differentially expressed in all the studies should be the core genes responding
to microgravity.
We analyzed our RNA-seq data both with the Tuxedo pipeline [30] and DEseq2 [31] to
conﬁrm that the results are not dependent upon the analysis method. The results from both
the methods were clustered together indicating their similarity (Figure 5b). The highest
number of DEG overlap was between our experiment and four-day CERISE, and the overlap
was signiﬁcant for both the methods (hypergeometric test, p-value < 0.05) (Figure 5c). Since
the overlap between the four-day CERISE and our results from the Tuxedo pipeline is

Cells 2023, 12, 270
11 of 16
higher, we decided to use the results from this pipeline throughout the manuscript. The
results from DEseq2 are reported in the supplementary data (Supplementary Figure S4;
Supplementary Table S5).
Figure 5. Microgravity-responsive genes are consistently differentially expressed in the ISS and under
simulated microgravity. (a) Shared DEGs among the space-ﬂown worms and our simulated micro-
gravity experiment. The highest number of common DEGs are between our experiment and four-day
CERISE. These genes are named as the “microgravity-responsive genes”. (b) The hierarchical cluster-
ing of the overall gene expressions among the space-ﬂown worms and our simulated microgravity
experiment. Our results analyzed with two different data analysis pipelines (*,**) demonstrated highly
similar patterns. (c) The number of common DEGs were high for our results analyzed with two dif-
ferent pipelines (*,**). Both of the pipelines showed that the common number of DEGs are higher
than the values expected by chance (hypergeometric text, p < 0.05). (d) Protein–protein interaction
of the microgravity-responsive genes from STRING database. (e) Gene ontology enrichment of the
microgravity-responsive genes. (f) Protein domain enrichment of the microgravity-responsive genes.
We determined a total of 134 common DEGs between our experiment and four-day
CERISE and categorized these 134 genes as the putative microgravity-responsive genes
(Figure 5a,c; Supplementary Table S6). We discarded 16 DEGs showing conﬂicting patterns
between the experiments (i.e., upregulated in one experiment and downregulated in the
other) for further analyses. We reasoned that if the remaining genes are collaboratively
involved in a biologically relevant process, they might have protein–protein interactions
(PPIs) with each other. To test this hypothesis, we examined the enrichment for PPI of these
genes by using the STRING database [39]. Among 118 DEGs, 58 had known PPIs with
each other (FDR < 1.0 × 10−16) indicating their collaborative involvement in a biological
process (Figure 5d). The GO analysis revealed that the microgravity-responsive genes play
a functional role in locomotion, body morphogenesis, and collagen and cuticulin-based
cuticle development (Figure 5e). Similarly, the products of microgravity-responsive genes
exhibit enrichment for nematode cuticle collagen N-terminal and collagen triple helix
repeat domains (Figure 5f). Together, our ﬁndings suggest that mainly the collagen genes
are affected under microgravity and this effect is reproducible between the studies.
Next, we asked whether the human orthologs of the microgravity-responsive genes
have relevant functions which might be affected in astronauts. We identiﬁed 64 human
orthologs to 44 microgravity-responsive genes in worms (Supplementary Table S7). The
human orthologs exhibited overrepresentation for protein domains including calpain
large subunit domain III and calpain family cysteine protease (Supplementary Figure S5).

Cells 2023, 12, 270
12 of 16
Given the reported upregulation of calpain under microgravity and its function in muscle
atrophy [62,63], these results provide an additional support for the conserved microgravity-
responsive genes in worms and humans.
Our analyses revealed that 20 putative TF genes are upregulated under simulated
microgravity conditions and compared these to the four-day CERISE mission. Among the
20 upregulated putative TF genes, Y56A3A.28 and T24C4.2 showed upregulation during
the four-day CERISE, indicating a potential transcriptional regulation role for these two in
response to microgravity. Our results additionally suggested that the upregulation pattern
of these TFs is maintained for eight and twelve days after the return, respectively. We could
not ﬁnd a human ortholog for T24C4.2 while the WormBase-suggested human ortholog of
Y56A3A.28 is PRDM16. PRDM16 regulates the switch between skeletal muscle and brown
fat cells by inhibiting the skeletal muscle development and gene expression and stimulating
brown adipogenesis [64]. Therefore, Y56A3A.28 can be a strong candidate as a negative
regulator of muscle development under microgravity conditions.
4. Discussion
In this study, we examined the simulated microgravity responsive gene expression
patterns and their maintained levels for four, eight, and twelve days after return to ground
conditions. Longevity regulating pathways such as insulin/IGF-1 and sphingolipid signal-
ing were affected under simulated microgravity. We identiﬁed the putative microgravity-
responsive genes by determining the common microgravity responsive transcriptomic
signatures by incorporating our study to a previous one with the same exposure time.
Moreover, we revealed that the microgravity-responsive genes are potentially conserved
between worms and humans by performing function analysis for the human orthologs of
the worm microgravity-responsive genes and identifying some of their potential transcrip-
tional regulators.
Sphingolipid signaling pathway plays crucial biological roles such as lifespan regula-
tion, apoptosis, and oxidative-stress response [52,54,65]. Our results revealed an overall
downregulation of the sphingolipid pathway which is generally related to an increase
in longevity [54]. A recent study identiﬁed decreased ASM-1 and ASM-2 levels in the
ISS-housed worms indicating a similar downregulation in response to microgravity [66].
Mutant strains or RNAi knockdown of acid sphingomyelinase ASM-1, ASM-2, and ASM-3
genes increase the lifespan, ASM-3 being the most prominent one [53]. Overall, both
simulated and the ISS-introduced microgravity seem to contribute to a potential increase
in longevity through the downregulation of the sphingolipid signaling pathway. Follow-
up experiments are needed to delimitate the contribution of sphingolipids on longevity
under microgravity.
In the Twins Study of NASA, Scott Kelly was sent to the ISS for 340 days while his
identical twin Mark Kelly remained on Earth. The results from this investigation showed
that Scott Kelly’s telomere length signiﬁcantly increased (14.5%) during the mission. In
addition, the sphingolipid signaling pathway was differentially expressed in Scott Kelly.
The telomere length of Mark Kelly, however, remained relatively stable [67]. Telomere
length and lifespan have a strong relationship. That is, longer telomeres are linked to longer
lifespan and increased resistance to environmental stress while shorter telomeres are linked
to accelerated aging and reduced longevity [68–71]. Ceramide functions in the regulation
of telomere length [55,72]. Considering our ﬁndings on decreased ceramide levels and the
observations on increased telomere in the ISS, investigation of the ceramide and telomere
length relationship might prove important to uncover the mechanisms affecting longevity
in space.
Most of the space ﬂight-triggered physiological changes are reverted after return
to Earth [24,67]. Similarly, we observed that the majority of the simulated microgravity-
induced DEGs (over 84%) are reverted 12 days after return to ground conditions. Our
results have revealed that while some biological processes are only affected during the
exposure, others can be affected for at least eight days (approximately two generations)

Cells 2023, 12, 270
13 of 16
after the return. For example, neuropeptide signaling pathway genes were differentially
expressed only during the exposure whereas defense response genes remain downregulated
for eight days after the return. Approximately 50% of the astronauts from Apollo mission
experienced minor bacterial or viral infections at the ﬁrst week of their return. Later studies
reported that space ﬂight-induced reactivation of latent herpes viruses which lasted for a
week after the return to Earth (reviewed in [73]). These consistent observations indicate
that the detrimental effects of space conditions (i.e., microgravity) on the immune system
carry over even after the return. Given the longevity differences in worms and humans,
future investigations could provide insight into whether the duration of the exposure has
an impact on the duration of the lasting effects.
The limitation of our study is the inclusion of mixed stage worms and the collection of
samples from whole animals. This limitation is common among the worm experiments
conducted in the ISS [23,74,75]. Considering the signiﬁcantly different gene expression
patterns among developmental stages and across cell types [76], it is possible to retrieve
biased results from the averaged gene expression levels. It is essential to address these
issues in future studies.
The comparison of spaceﬂight responsive genes in C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster
demonstrated only six common genes from the European Soyuz ﬂights to the ISS [17]. Sim-
ilarly, the overlap between our results and four-day CERISE were relatively small. One of
the reasons for these discrepancies can be the batch effects introduced due to the differences
in the experimental designs. For instance, different exposure times to the space conditions
or the usage of different food source or strain may induce distinct responses in the worms.
It is crucial to examine the effects of individual factors (e.g., diet and gravitational force)
along with the combinatory ones. Towards that end, we previously reported the impact of
liquid cultivation of two C. elegans strains on gene expression and phenotype [26,77] and
here, studied the impact of simulated microgravity.
5. Conclusions
Given the elevated interest in the human exploration of space, it is crucial to determine
the detrimental effects of the space conditions on biological systems. We believe that our re-
sults will be a valuable reference for the studies on transcriptomic response to microgravity
by controlling for the renowned batch effects from space conditions, allowing the worms to
acclimate to liquid cultivation before the experiment, presenting the sustained transcrip-
tomic responses after return to ground along with their putative regulators, integrating the
results from a previous study conducted at the ISS, and providing the response of different
ceramide proﬁles to simulated microgravity.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/cells12020270/s1.
Author Contributions: ˙I.Ç. and C.R.S. designed the study. ˙I.Ç. and J.H.D. conducted the experiments.
˙I.Ç. performed the analyses and interpreted the results. A.J. developed the clinostat. ˙I.Ç., A.J.
and C.R.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by NASA grants NNX12AR59G, NNX10AN63H, and NNX13AM08G,
awarded to CRS and Sigma Xi grant G2016100191301836, awarded to ˙IÇ. The BIOMIX computing
cluster and the Bioimaging center are supported by Delaware INBRE grant (NIH/NIGMS GM103446)
and Delaware EPSCoR grants (NSF EPS-0814251 and NSF IIA-1330446). The University of Delaware
Sequencing and Genotyping Center is supported by the NIH NIGMS IDeA Program Grant #P20
GM103446. None of these funding bodies were involved in the design, data collection, analysis,
interpretation of data, or in writing the manuscript.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Cells 2023, 12, 270
14 of 16
Data Availability Statement: All the sequencing data generated for this study have been submitted
to the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under accession
number GSE122125.
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Michael Moore for his help developing the clinostat. ˙IÇ
acknowledges the University of Delaware for Dissertation Fellowship and Graduate Fellow Award.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1.
Stein, T.P. Weight, Muscle and Bone Loss during Space Flight: Another Perspective. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2013, 113, 2171–2181.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Crucian, B.E.; Choukèr, A.; Simpson, R.J.; Mehta, S.; Marshall, G.; Smith, S.M.; Zwart, S.R.; Heer, M.; Ponomarev, S.;
Whitmire, A.; et al. Immune System Dysregulation during Spaceﬂight: Potential Countermeasures for Deep Space Exploration
Missions. Front. Immunol. 2018, 9, 1437. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3.
Grimm, D.; Grosse, J.; Wehland, M.; Mann, V.; Reseland, J.E.; Sundaresan, A.; Corydon, T.J. The Impact of Microgravity on Bone
in Humans. Bone 2016, 87, 44–56. [CrossRef]
4.
Sachs, J. Lectures on the Physiology of Plants; Clarendon Press: Oxford, UK, 1887.
5.
Kessler, J. The Internal Dynamics of Slowly Rotating Biological Systems. ASGSB Bull. 1992, 5, 11–21. [PubMed]
6.
Dedolph, R.R.; Oemick, D.A.; Wilson, B.R.; Smith, G.R. Causal Basis of Gravity Stimulus Nulliﬁcation by Clinostat Rotation. Plant
Physiol. 1967, 42, 1373–1383. [CrossRef]
7.
Gruener, R.; Hoeger, G. Vector-Averaged Gravity Alters Myocyte and Neuron Properties in Cell Culture. Aviat. Space. Environ.
Med. 1991, 62, 1159–1165.
8.
Wuest, S.L.; Stern, P.; Casartelli, E.; Egli, M. Fluid Dynamics Appearing during Simulated Microgravity Using Random Positioning
Machines. PLoS ONE 2017, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Sievers, A.; Hejnowicz, Z. How Well Does the Clinostat Mimic the Effect of Microgravity on Plant Cells and Organs? ASGSB Bull.
1992, 5, 69–75.
10.
Brown, A.H.; Dahl, A.O.; Chapman, D.K. Limitation on the Use of the Horizontal Clinostat as a Gravity Compensator. PLANT
Physiol. 1976, 58, 127–130. [CrossRef]
11.
Briegleb, W. Some Qualitative and Quantitative Aspects of the Fast-Rotating Clinostat as a Research Tool. ASGSB Bull. 1992,
5, 23–30.
12.
Hemmersbach, R.; Volkmann, D.; Häder, D.-P. Graviorientation in Protists and Plants. J. Plant Physiol. 1999, 154, 1–15. [CrossRef]
13.
Häder, D.-P.; Hemmersbach, R.; Lebert, M. Gravity and the Behavior of Unicellular Organisms; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 2005; ISBN 9780511546211.
14.
Zhao, Y.; Johnsen, R.; Baillie, D.; Rose, A. Worms in Space? A Model Biological Dosimeter. Gravit. Space Biol. Bull 2005, 18, 11–16.
15.
Tissenbaum, H.A. Using C. elegans for Aging Research. Invertebr. Reprod. Dev. 2015, 59, 59–63. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Selch, F.; Higashibata, A.; Imamizo-Sato, M.; Higashitani, A.; Ishioka, N.; Szewczyk, N.J.; Conley, C.A. Genomic Response of the
Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans to Spaceﬂight. Adv. Space Res. 2008, 41, 807–815. [CrossRef]
17.
Adenle, A.A.; Johnsen, B.; Szewczyk, N.J. Review of the Results from the International C. elegans First Experiment (ICE-FIRST).
Adv. Sp. Res. 2009, 44, 210–216. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Higashibata, A.; Szewczyk, N.J.; Conley, C.A.; Imamizo-Sato, M.; Higashitani, A.; Ishioka, N. Decreased Expression of Myogenic
Transcription Factors and Myosin Heavy Chains in Caenorhabditis elegans Muscles Developed during Spaceﬂight. J. Exp. Biol.
2006, 209, 3209–3218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Qiao, L.; Luo, S.; Liu, Y.; Li, X.; Wang, G.; Huang, Z. Reproductive and Locomotory Capacities of Caenorhabditis elegans Were
Not Affected by Simulated Variable Gravities and Spaceﬂight during the Shenzhou-8 Mission. Astrobiology 2013, 13, 617–625.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Honda, Y.; Higashibata, A.; Matsunaga, Y.; Yonezawa, Y.; Kawano, T.; Higashitani, A.; Kuriyama, K.; Shimazu, T.; Tanaka, M.;
Szewczyk, N.J.; et al. Genes Down-Regulated in Spaceﬂight Are Involved in the Control of Longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Sci. Rep. 2012, 2, 413–429. [CrossRef]
21.
Higashibata, A.; Hashizume, T.; Nemoto, K.; Higashitani, N.; Etheridge, T.; Mori, C.; Harada, S.; Sugimoto, T.; Szewczyk, N.J.;
Baba, S.A.; et al. Microgravity Elicits Reproducible Alterations in Cytoskeletal and Metabolic Gene and Protein Expression in
Space-Flown Caenorhabditis elegans. NPJ Microgravity 2016, 2, 15022. [CrossRef]
22.
Gao, Y.; Xu, D.; Zhao, L.; Zhang, M.; Sun, Y. Effects of Microgravity on DNA Damage Response in Caenorhabditis elegans during
Shenzhou-8 Spaceﬂight. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 2015, 91, 531–539. [CrossRef]
23.
Then, S.M.; Jusoh, N.F.; Harun, R.; Nathan, S.; Szewczyk, N.J.; Stodieck, L.; Jamal, R. Multi-Generational Culture of C. elegans
on a Long-Term Space Flight Revealed Changes in Expression of Genes Involved in Longevity, DNA Repair, and Locomotion.
Asia-Pac. J. Mol. Med. 2016, 4, 1.

Cells 2023, 12, 270
15 of 16
24.
Honda, Y.; Honda, S.; Narici, M.; Szewczyk, N.J. Spaceﬂight and Ageing: Reﬂecting on Caenorhabditis elegans in Space. Gerontology
2014, 60, 138–142. [CrossRef]
25.
Ishioka, N.; Higashibata, A. Space Experiments Using C. elegans as a Model Organism. In Handbook of Space Pharmaceuticals;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018.
26.
Çelen, I.˙I.; Doh, J.H.; Sabanayagam, C.R. Effects of Liquid Cultivation on Gene Expression and Phenotype of C. elegans. BMC
Genomics 2018, 19, 562. [CrossRef]
27.
Lev, I.; Bril, R.; Liu, Y.; Ceré, L.I.; Rechavi, O. Inter-Generational Consequences for Growing Caenorhabditis elegans in Liquid. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2019, 374, 20180125. [CrossRef]
28.
Doh, J.H.; Moore, A.B.; Çelen, ˙I.; Moore, M.T.; Sabanayagam, C.R. ChIP and Chips: Introducing the WormPharm for Correlative
Studies Employing Pharmacology and Genome-Wide Analyses in C. elegans. J. Biol. Methods 2016, 3, 1–11. [CrossRef]
29.
Andrews, S. FastQC: A Quality Control Tool for High Throughput Sequence Data. Available online: www.Bioinformatics.
Babraham.Ac.Uk/Projects/Fastqc/ (accessed on 1 January 2019).
30.
Trapnell, C.; Roberts, A.; Goff, L.; Pertea, G.; Kim, D.; Kelley, D.R.; Pimentel, H.; Salzberg, S.L.; Rinn, J.L.; Pachter, L. Differential
Gene and Transcript Expression Analysis of RNA-Seq Experiments with TopHat and Cufﬂinks. Nat. Protoc. 2012, 7, 562–578.
[CrossRef]
31.
Love, M.I.; Huber, W.; Anders, S. Moderated Estimation of Fold Change and Dispersion for RNA-Seq Data with DESeq2. Genome
Biol. 2014, 15. [CrossRef]
32.
Patro, R.; Duggal, G.; Love, M.I.; Irizarry, R.A.; Kingsford, C. Salmon Provides Fast and Bias-Aware Quantiﬁcation of Transcript
Expression. Nat. Methods 2017, 14, 417–419. [CrossRef]
33.
Cunningham, F.; Amode, M.R.; Barrell, D.; Beal, K.; Billis, K.; Brent, S.; Carvalho-Silva, D.; Clapham, P.; Coates, G.;
Fitzgerald, S.; et al. Ensembl 2015. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 43, D662–D669. [CrossRef]
34.
Harris, T.W.; Baran, J.; Bieri, T.; Cabunoc, A.; Chan, J.; Chen, W.J.; Davis, P.; Done, J.; Grove, C.; Howe, K.; et al. WormBase 2014:
New Views of Curated Biology. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014, 42, D789–D793. [CrossRef]
35.
Huang, D.W.; Sherman, B.T.; Lempicki, R.A. Systematic and Integrative Analysis of Large Gene Lists Using DAVID Bioinformatics
Resources. Nat. Protoc. 2008, 4, 44–57. [CrossRef]
36.
Shannon, P.; Markiel, A.; Ozier, O.; Baliga, N.S.; Wang, J.T.; Ramage, D.; Amin, N.; Schwikowski, B.; Ideker, T. Cytoscape:
A Software Environment for Integrated Models of Biomolecular Interaction Networks. Genome Res. 2003, 13, 2498–2504.
[CrossRef]
37.
Maere, S.; Heymans, K.; Kuiper, M. BiNGO: A Cytoscape Plugin to Assess Overrepresentation of Gene Ontology Categories in
Biological Networks. Bioinformatics 2005, 21, 3448–3449. [CrossRef]
38.
Angeles-Albores, D.; Lee, R.Y.; Chan, J.; Sternberg, P.W. Tissue Enrichment Analysis for C. elegans Genomics. BMC Bioinform.
2016, 17, 366. [CrossRef]
39.
Szklarczyk, D.; Morris, J.H.; Cook, H.; Kuhn, M.; Wyder, S.; Simonovic, M.; Santos, A.; Doncheva, N.T.; Roth, A.; Bork, P.; et al.
The STRING Database in 2017: Quality-Controlled Protein-Protein Association Networks, Made Broadly Accessible. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2017, 45, D362–D368. [CrossRef]
40.
Kim, W.; Underwood, R.S.; Greenwald, I.; Shaye, D.D. OrthoList 2: A New Comparative Genomic Analysis of Human and
Caenorhabditis elegans Genes. Genetics 2018, 210, 445–461. [CrossRef]
41.
Bligh, E.G.; Dyer, W.J. A Rapid Method of Total Lipid Extraction and Puriﬁcation. Can. J. Biochem. Physiol. 1959, 37, 911–917.
[CrossRef]
42.
Dedolph, R.R.; Dipert, M.H. The Physical Basis of Gravity Stimulus Nulliﬁcation by Clinostat Rotation. Plant Physiol. 1971, 47,
756–764. [CrossRef]
43.
Lee Silver, I. The Dynamics of a Discrete Geotropic Sensor Subject to Rotation-Induced Gravity Compensation. J. Theor. Biol. 1976,
61, 353–362. [CrossRef]
44.
Zhao, S.; Fung-Leung, W.P.; Bittner, A.; Ngo, K.; Liu, X. Comparison of RNA-Seq and Microarray in Transcriptome Proﬁling of
Activated T Cells. PLoS ONE 2014, 9. [CrossRef]
45.
Tee, L.F.; Neoh, H.; Then, S.M.; Murad, N.A.; Asillam, M.F.; Hashim, M.H.; Nathan, S.; Jamal, R. Effects of Simulated Microgravity
on Gene Expression and Biological Phenotypes of a Single Generation Caenorhabditis elegans Cultured on 2 Different Media. Life
Sci. Space Res. 2017, 15, 11–17. [CrossRef]
46.
Reinke, V.; Krause, M.; Okkema, P. Transcriptional Regulation of Gene Expression in C. elegans. WormBook 2013, 1–34. [CrossRef]
47.
Lin, K.; Hsin, H.; Libina, N.; Kenyon, C. Regulation of the Caenorhabditis elegans Longevity Protein DAF-16 by Insulin/IGF-1 and
Germline Signaling. Nat. Genet. 2001, 28, 139–145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Seung, W.O.; Mukhopadhyay, A.; Dixit, B.L.; Raha, T.; Green, M.R.; Tissenbaum, H.A. Identiﬁcation of Direct DAF-16 Targets
Controlling Longevity, Metabolism and Diapause by Chromatin Immunoprecipitation. Nat. Genet. 2006, 38, 251–257. [CrossRef]
49.
Murphy, C.T.; McCarroll, S.A.; Bargmann, C.I.; Fraser, A.; Kamath, R.S.; Ahringer, J.; Li, H.; Kenyon, C. Genes That Act
Downstream of DAF-16 to Inﬂuence the Lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 2003, 424, 277–284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Lee, S.S.; Kennedy, S.; Tolonen, A.C.; Ruvkun, G. DAF-16 Target Genes That Control C. elegans Life-Span and Metabolism. Science
2003, 300, 644–647. [CrossRef]
51.
Tepper, R.G.; Ashraf, J.; Kaletsky, R.; Kleemann, G.; Murphy, C.T.; Bussemaker, H.J. PQM-1 Complements DAF-16 as a Key
Transcriptional Regulator of DAF-2-Mediated Development and Longevity. Cell 2013, 154, 676–690. [CrossRef]

Cells 2023, 12, 270
16 of 16
52.
Cui, M.; Wang, Y.; Cavaleri, J.; Kelson, T.; Teng, Y.; Han, M. Starvation-Induced Stress Response Is Critically Impacted by
Ceramide Levels in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 2017, 205, 775–785. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Kim, Y.; Sun, H. ASM-3 Acid Sphingomyelinase Functions as a Positive Regulator of the DAF-2/AGE-1 Signaling Pathway and
Serves as a Novel Anti-Aging Target. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e45890. [CrossRef]
54.
Cutler, R.G.; Thompson, K.W.; Camandola, S.; Mack, K.T.; Mattson, M.P. Sphingolipid Metabolism Regulates Development and
Lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mech. Ageing Dev. 2014, 143–144, 9–18. [CrossRef]
55.
Huang, X.; Withers, B.R.; Dickson, R.C. Sphingolipids and Lifespan Regulation. Biochim. Biophys Acta 2014, 1841, 657–664.
[CrossRef]
56.
Hernández-Corbacho, M.J.; Jenkins, R.W.; Clarke, C.J.; Hannun, Y.A.; Obeid, L.M.; Snider, A.J.; Siskind, L.J. Accumulation of
Long-Chain Glycosphingolipids during Aging Is Prevented by Caloric Restriction. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e20411. [CrossRef]
57.
Straczkowski, M.; Kowalska, I. The Role of Skeletal Muscle Sphingolipids in the Development of Insulin Resistance. Rev. Diabet.
Stud. 2008, 5, 13–24. [CrossRef]
58.
Bismuth, J.; Lin, P.; Yao, Q.; Chen, C. Ceramide: A Common Pathway for Atherosclerosis? Atherosclerosis 2008, 196, 497–504.
[CrossRef]
59.
Chan, J.P.; Brown, J.; Hark, B.; Nolan, A.; Servello, D.; Hrobuchak, H.; Staab, T.A. Loss of Sphingosine Kinase Alters Life History
Traits and Locomotor Function in Caenorhabditis elegans. Front. Genet. 2017, 8, 132. [CrossRef]
60.
Menuz, V.; Howell, K.S.; Gentina, S.; Epstein, S.; Riezman, I.; Fornallaz-Mulhauser, M.; Hengartner, M.O.; Gomez, M.; Riezman, H.;
Martinou, J.C. Protection of C. elegans from Anoxia by HYL-2 Ceramide Synthase. Science 2009, 324, 381–384. [CrossRef]
61.
Deng, X.; Yin, X.; Allan, R.; Lu, D.D.; Maurer, C.W.; Haimovitz-Friedman, A.; Fuks, Z.; Shaham, S.; Kolesnick, R. Ceramide
Biogenesis Is Required for Radiation-Induced Apoptosis in the Germ Line of C. elegans. Science 2008, 322, 110–115. [CrossRef]
62.
Gao, Y.; Arfat, Y.; Wang, H.; Goswami, N. Muscle Atrophy Induced by Mechanical Unloading: Mechanisms and Potential
Countermeasures. Front. Physiol. 2018, 9, 235. [CrossRef]
63.
Salazar, J.J.; Michele, D.E.; Brooks, S.V. Inhibition of Calpain Prevents Muscle Weakness and Disruption of Sarcomere Structure
during Hindlimb Suspension. J. Appl. Physiol. 2010, 108, 120–127. [CrossRef]
64.
Seale, P.; Bjork, B.; Yang, W.; Kajimura, S.; Chin, S.; Kuang, S.; Scimè, A.; Devarakonda, S.; Conroe, H.M.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; et al.
PRDM16 Controls a Brown Fat/Skeletal Muscle Switch. Nature 2008, 454, 961–967. [CrossRef]
65.
Cutler, R.G.; Pedersen, W.A.; Camandola, S.; Rothstein, J.D.; Mattson, M.P. Evidence That Accumulation of Ceramides and
Cholesterol Esters Mediates Oxidative Stress—Induced Death of Motor Neurons in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Ann. Neurol.
2002, 52, 448–457. [CrossRef]
66.
Graveley, A.; Vlasov, A.; Freeman, A.; Wu, K.; Szewczyk, N.J.; D’Cruz, R.; Batt, J. Levels of Acid Sphingomyelinase (ASM) in
Caenorhabditis elegans in Microgravity. Gravit. Space Res. 2018, 6, 27–36. [CrossRef]
67.
Garrett-Bakelman, F.E.; Darshi, M.; Green, S.J.; Gur, R.C.; Lin, L.; Macias, B.R.; McKenna, M.J.; Meydan, C.; Mishra, T.;
Nasrini, J.; et al. The NASA Twins Study: A Multidimensional Analysis of a Year-Long Human Spaceﬂight. Science 2019, 364,
eaau8650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Sahin, E.; Depinho, R.A. Linking Functional Decline of Telomeres, Mitochondria and Stem Cells during Ageing. Nature 2010, 464,
520–528. [CrossRef]
69.
Joeng, K.S.; Song, E.J.; Lee, K.J.; Lee, J. Long Lifespan in Worms with Long Telomeric DNA. Nat. Genet. 2004, 36, 607–611.
[CrossRef]
70.
Monaghan, P. Telomeres and Life Histories: The Long and the Short of It. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2010, 1206, 130–142. [CrossRef]
71.
Heidinger, B.J.; Blount, J.D.; Boner, W.; Grifﬁths, K.; Metcalfe, N.B.; Monaghan, P. Telomere Length in Early Life Predicts Lifespan.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 1743–1748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Saddoughi, S.A.; Song, P.; Ogretmen, B. Roles of Bioactive Sphingolipids in Cancer Biology and Therapeutics. In Lipids in Health
and Disease; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2008; Volume 49, pp. 413–440.
73.
Taylor, P.W. Impact of Space Flight on Bacterial Virulence and Antibiotic Susceptibility. Infect. Drug Resist. 2015, 8, 249–262.
[CrossRef]
74.
Szewczyk, N.J.; Tillman, J.; Conley, C.A.; Granger, L.; Segalat, L.; Higashitani, A.; Honda, S.; Honda, Y.; Kagawa, H.;
Adachi, R.; et al. Description of International Caenorhabditis elegans Experiment First Flight (ICE-FIRST). Adv. Space Res. 2008, 42,
1072–1079. [CrossRef]
75.
Higashitani, A.; Hashizume, T.; Sugimoto, T.; Mori, C.; Nemoto, K.; Etheridge, T.; Higashitani, N.; Takanami, T.; Suzuki, H.;
Fukui, K.; et al. C. elegans RNAi Space Experiment (CERISE) in Japanese Experiment Module KIBO. Biol. Sci. Sp. 2009, 23, 183–187.
[CrossRef]
76.
Spencer, W.C.; Zeller, G.; Watson, J.D.; Henz, S.R.; Watkins, K.L.; McWhirter, R.D.; Petersen, S.; Sreedharan, V.T.; Widmer, C.;
Jo, J.; et al. A Spatial and Temporal Map of C. elegans Gene Expression. Genome Res. 2011, 21, 325–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Çelen, ˙I.; Doh, J.H.; Sabanayagam, C. Genetic Adaptation of C. elegans to Environment Changes I: Multigenerational Analysis of
the Transcriptome. bioRxiv 2017, 194506. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
