Transcriptional and Hormonal Regulation of Gravitropism of
Woody Stems in Populus
OPEN
Suzanne Gerttula,a Matthew Zinkgraf,a Gloria K. Muday,b Daniel R. Lewis,b Farid M. Ibatullin,c,d Harry Brumer,c,e
Foster Hart,f Shawn D. Mansﬁeld,f Vladimir Filkov,g and Andrew Groovera,h,1
a US Forest Service, Paciﬁc Southwest Research Station, Davis, California 95618
b Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27106
c Division of Glycoscience, School of Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology, AlbaNova University Centre, S-106 91 Stockholm,
Sweden
d Biophysics Division, Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, National Research Center Kurchatov Institute, Gatchina 188300, Russia
e Michael Smith Laboratories and Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4,
Canada
f Department of Wood Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada
g Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis, California 95618
h Department of Plant Biology, University of California, Davis, California 95618
ORCID IDs: 0000-0002-0377-4517 (G.K.M.); 0000-0002-7660-4172 (F.M.I.); 0000-0002-0175-554X (S.D.M.); 0000-0002-6686-5774 (A.G.)
Angiosperm trees reorient their woody stems by asymmetrically producing a specialized xylem tissue, tension wood, which
exerts a strong contractile force resulting in negative gravitropism of the stem. Here, we show, in Populus trees, that initial
gravity perception and response occurs in specialized cells through sedimentation of starch-ﬁlled amyloplasts and
relocalization of the auxin transport protein, PIN3. Gibberellic acid treatment stimulates the rate of tension wood formation
and gravibending and enhances tissue-speciﬁc expression of an auxin-responsive reporter. Gravibending, maturation of
contractile ﬁbers, and gibberellic acid (GA) stimulation of tension wood formation are all sensitive to transcript levels of the
Class I KNOX homeodomain transcription factor-encoding gene ARBORKNOX2 (ARK2). We generated genome-wide
transcriptomes for trees in which gene expression was perturbed by gravistimulation, GA treatment, and modulation of
ARK2 expression. These data were employed in computational analyses to model the transcriptional networks underlying
wood formation, including identiﬁcation and dissection of gene coexpression modules associated with wood phenotypes, GA
response, and ARK2 binding to genes within modules. We propose a model for gravitropism in the woody stem in which the
peripheral location of PIN3-expressing cells relative to the cambium results in auxin transport toward the cambium in the top
of the stem, triggering tension wood formation, while transport away from the cambium in the bottom of the stem triggers
opposite wood formation.
INTRODUCTION
Gravity is a universal input that modulates plant growth and de-
velopment, and various plant lineages and organs have evolved
mechanisms to regulate growth and orientation relative to the
force of gravity. Much of what is known about plant responses to
gravity comes from studies of herbaceous annual plants wherein
gravitropic responses rely on differential elongation. By contrast,
ligniﬁed woody stems can no longer undergo elongation, ne-
cessitating a different solution. Instead, gravistimulated woody
branches and stems undergo asymmetric radial growth to pro-
duce “reaction wood” (Sinnott, 1952; Wilson and Archer, 1977;
Ruelle, 2014). In gymnosperms, reaction wood is termed com-
pression wood and forms on the bottom side of the stem where it
generates compressive force to push the stem upward (Timell,
1986; Ruelle, 2014). In angiosperms, reaction wood is termed
tension wood and forms on the upper side of gravistimulated
stemswhere itgenerates atensile forcethatpullsthe stemupward
(MellerowiczandGorshkova,2012).Tensionwoodisproducedvia
an increased rate of cell division in the vascular cambium and is
characterized by a reduced number of water conducting vessel
elements and specialized tension wood ﬁbers containing a ge-
latinous cell wall layer (G-layer), which is believed to be central to
force generation (Mellerowicz and Gorshkova, 2012). Tension
wood ﬁbers are capable of generating a strong contractile force,
which results in negative gravitropism of the stem. The term
“opposite wood” describes the wood that forms on the lower side
of gravistimulated stems, but, because it is anatomically similar to
“normal wood” formed by upright stems, opposite wood has
received little research attention.
To comprehensively describe the gravitropism of woody an-
giosperm stems, four questions must be addressed: (1) What are
the cells responsible for sensing gravity (i.e., graviperception), (2)
what are the signals produced by gravity-sensing cells and how
are they perceived by wood-forming and cambial cells, (3) how is
force generated by tension wood ﬁbers, and (4) how are the de-
velopmental processes leading to tension wood production
1 Address correspondence to agroover@fs.fed.us.
The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁndings
presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the
Instructions for Authors (www.plantcell.org) is: Andrew Groover
(agroover@fs.fed.us).
OPENArticles can be viewed online without a subscription.
www.plantcell.org/cgi/doi/10.1105/tpc.15.00531
The Plant Cell, Vol. 27: 2800–2813, October 2015, www.plantcell.org ã 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

regulated? Currently, which cells are responsible for gravity
perception in woody stems is unclear. One possibility is that
graviperception occurs in the shoot apex of the stem, and a signal
is propagated down the stem. Alternatively, graviperception could
occur within the woody stem itself. In Populus, starch-ﬁlled
plastids that could serve as statoliths were observed in some cells
of the cortex of young stems (Leach and Wareing, 1967), but no
function could be ascribed to these cells in graviperception.
Likewise,themechanismsresponsiblefortheinitialgraviresponse
of woody stems have not been established. Similar to the gravi-
responses of roots and herbaceous shoots, auxin has been im-
plicated in the graviresponse of woody stems, but conﬂicting
conclusionsfromexperimentalectopicapplicationofauxinversus
measurementsofauxinconcentrationswithinstemsaredifﬁcultto
reconcile (Hellgren et al., 2004). Other hormones, including gib-
berellicacid(GA)(Israelssonetal.,2005)andethylene(Andersson-
Gunnerås et al., 2003), have also been implicated in tension wood
formation and are potentially involved in initial graviresponse
signaling, but a comprehensive understanding of how these
hormones interact and affect development of secondary vascular
tissues is still incomplete.
Several competing hypotheses for force generation by tension
wood formation have been proposed (Clair et al., 2006; Goswami
et al., 2008; Mellerowicz and Gorshkova, 2012) but all involve the
development of ﬁbers with specialized wall properties. Notably,
the G-layer is a tertiary cell wall layer in tension wood ﬁbers
characterized by low lignin, high cellulose, and a low cellulose
microﬁbril angle (Norberg and Meier, 1996; Clair et al., 2011) that
may be fundamental to force generation. Fasciclin-like arabino-
galactan-encoding genes (FLAs) are highly upregulated during
tension wood formation (Lafarguette et al., 2004; Andersson-
Gunneras et al., 2006; Azri et al., 2014), and the FLA protein
products have been shown to affect stem biomechanics through
changes in cellulose deposition and/or cell wall structural prop-
erties (MacMillan et al., 2010). Thus, in addition to serving as
molecular markers of tension wood development, FLA proteins
could bedirectly involved incontributing to the altered mechanical
properties of tension wood. Additionally, xyloglucan endo-
transglycosylase (XET)-dependent linkages between the
G-layer and secondary cell walls have been identiﬁed and have
been implicated in the transmission of tensile stress between the
G-layer and adjacent cell wall layers (Mellerowicz et al., 2008;
Mellerowicz and Gorshkova, 2012).
At the regulatory level, large numbers of genes are differentially
expressed in tension wood, including large suites of cell wall- and
hormone-relatedgenes(Déjardinetal.,2004;Andersson-Gunneras
et al., 2006). Individual transcription factors have been char-
acterized that affect wood development (Zhong and Ye, 2013),
including the Populus Class I KNOX homeodomain protein
ARBORKNOX2 (ARK2; Potri.002G113300), which is orthologous
to Arabidopsis thaliana BREVIPEDECELLUS/KNAT1 (At4g08150)
(Chuck et al., 1996; Venglat et al., 2002). ARK2 is expressed
broadly in the cambial zone and lignifying cells and affects cell
differentiation and expression of tension wood-related genes (Du
et al., 2009). However, to date there are no transcription factors
identiﬁed that speciﬁcally affect tension wood development, and
the transcriptional networks underlying tension wood development
remain poorly deﬁned.
Here, we present experiments in Populus that identify the cells
responsible for graviperception, describe changes in radial auxin
transport during graviresponse, and describe the ARK2 and GA-
sensitive transcriptional networks underlying tension wood de-
velopment. We suggest that the early graviresponse of auxin
transport toward the cambium on the tension wood side of the
stemandtowardtheoutercortexonthelowersideofthestemsets
in place a developmental switch leading to the different tran-
scriptional and developmental outcomes of these tissues.
RESULTS
ARK2 Transcript Levels Inﬂuence Fiber Development
and Gravibending
To develop a comprehensive model of tension wood formation,
we ﬁrst focused on characterizing tension wood formation and
gravitropism in Populus with altered ARK2 expression. Using
previously characterized genotypes (Du et al., 2009), we assayed
gravibending using time-lapse videos for wild-type, ARK2-
downregulated (miRNA-ARK2), and ARK2-overexpressing (OE-
ARK2) Populus trees for a 2-week period after the trees were
subjected to 90° gravistimulation (Supplemental Movies 1 to 3).
miRNA-ARK2 plants had a reduced gravibending response in
comparison to the wild type, whereas OE-ARK2 plants displayed
dramatically enhanced gravibending (Figures 1A to 1C; quantiﬁed
in Supplemental Figures 1A to 1C and Supplemental Movies 1 to
3). Measurement of elongation growth in upright versus gravi-
stimulated plants revealed an additional difference among the
genotypes in response to gravistimulation. The wild type and OE-
ARK2 both reduced elongation growth during gravistimulation,
while miRNA-ARK2 plants did not. Surprisingly, histological
comparison of stem sections showed that after 2 weeks of
gravibending miRNA-ARK2 stems had produced more tension
wood ﬁbers in comparison to the wild type, whereas the excep-
tional gravibending response of OE-ARK2 was associated with
fewer tension wood ﬁbersformed (Figures 1D to1F; Supplemental
Figure 2 shows matched opposite wood sections). This difference
was also reﬂected in stem diameters, with miRNA-ARK2 and the
wild type having similar diameters nearly twice that of OE-ARK2
(Supplemental Figure 1E).
The negative correlation between number of tension wood
ﬁbers produced and gravibending among ARK2 genotypes could
reﬂect differences in the competency of tension wood ﬁbers to
generate force in the different genotypes. To test the hypothesis
that ARK2 might also inﬂuence the production of functional cell
walls capable of generating force, each genotype was assayed for
two markers that are known to be associated with maturation of
functional tension wood ﬁbers and G-layers, FLAs (Lafarguette
et al., 2004; Andersson-Gunneras et al., 2006; Azri et al., 2014),
and XET (Mellerowicz et al., 2008; Mellerowicz and Gorshkova,
2012). Immunolocalizations using an antibody (JIM14) recogniz-
ing arabinogalactan protein epitopes (Knox et al., 1991) (pre-
sumably including FLAs) strongly labeled the developing G-layer
of tension wood ﬁbers (Figure 2) as well as rays in all wood types
(Supplemental Figure 3). JIM14 labeling revealed distinct differ-
ences in the maturation schedule of tension wood ﬁbers among
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2801

the genotypes. OE-ARK2 trees displayed a distinct G-layer with
JIM14 labeling within a few cell divisions of the cambium, while
JIM14-labeled G-layers appeared much later and more erratically
in miRNA-ARK2 tension wood (Figures 2A to 2C). For each ge-
notype, the average number of tension wood ﬁbers produced per
day and the average number of tension wood ﬁbers between the
cambiumandtheﬁrstJIM14-labeledG-layerﬁberwasdetermined
and used to calculate the average number of days required for
G-layers to mature. As shown in Table 1, G-layer maturation re-
quired an average of 6.6, 4.9, and 3.6 d for miRNA-ARK2, the wild
type, and OE-ARK2, respectively. Thus, faster maturation of
G-layers was associated with enhanced gravibending.
Similarly, in situ imaging of XET activity using the ﬂuorescent
substrate XXXG-SR (Nishikubo et al., 2007) labeled cells of the
cortex and secondary phloem in all wood types and speciﬁ-
cally labeled G-layers in developing tension wood (Figure 3;
Supplemental Figure 4). Similar to JIM14 labeling, OE-ARK2
G-layers were labeled within a few cells of the cambium, while
miRNA-ARK2
showed
variable
and
signiﬁcantly
greater
numbers of cells between the cambium and ﬁbers with labeled
G-layers (Figure 3). Thus, altering ARK2 expression manifests in
dramaticdifferencesinﬁberproduction,ﬁbermaturation,andstem
gravibending, with gravibending performance positively corre-
lated with the rate of G-layer maturation.
Graviperception and Response Involves Changes in
Auxin Transport
We next asked whether changes in tension wood and gravi-
bending associated with altered ARK2 transcript abundance
could reﬂect differences in auxin transport. While the inter-
pretations have varied (Hellgren et al., 2004), application of ex-
ogenous auxin to the upper surface of a Populus branch typically
inhibits tension wood formation (Wilson and Archer, 1977; Little
and Savidge, 1987), raising the possibility that changes in auxin
transport down and/or around the stem could inﬂuence de-
velopmental outcomes. We ﬁrst measured polar (longitudinal)
auxin transport from the shoot apex toward the base (basipetal) in
woody stems. The greatest amount of transport was found for
miRNA-ARK2 trees, while OE-ARK2 trees transported less auxin
than wild-type controls (Figure 4A).
To understand how the lateral transport of auxin might be
changed during graviresponse, antibodies were raised against
Populus orthologs of the auxin polar transport protein Arabidopsis
Figure 1. ARK2 Expression Correlates with Gravibending and Tension Wood Fiber Production.
(A) End point of 2-week time-lapse gravibending trial with miRNA-ARK2 (see Supplemental Movies 1 to 3; quantiﬁed in Supplemental Figure 1).
(B) End point of 2-week time-lapse gravibending trial with the wild type (see Supplemental Movies 1 to 3; quantiﬁed in Supplemental Figure 1).
(C) End point of 2-week time-lapse gravibending trial with OE-ARK2 (see Supplemental Movies 1 to 3; quantiﬁed in Supplemental Figure 1).
(D) Histology of tension wood production in miRNA-ARK2.
(E) Histology of tension wood production in wild type.
(F) Histology of tension wood production in OE-ARK2.
Histological staining in (D) to (F) is with phloroglucinol and astra blue (see Methods). co, cortex; cz, cambial zone; pp, phloem ﬁbers; sp, secondary phloem;
tw, tension wood; xy, secondary xylem. Bars = 10 cm in (A) to (C) and 500 µm in (D) to (F).
2802
The Plant Cell

PIN-FORMED3, tested for speciﬁcity in immunoblots and control
immunolocalizations (see Methods; Supplemental Figure 5), and
used in immunolocalization experiments to visualize PIN3 protein.
In younger, upright stems that had recently initiated secondary
growth, PIN3 showed a distinct uniform localization to the plasma
membranes of endodermal cells in the inner cortex (Figure 4B),
consistent with previous description of this gene’s expression in
the cortex in hybrid aspen (Populus tremula 3 tremuloides)
(Schrader et al., 2003). The endodermal cells contained starch-
ﬁlled amyloplasts (Figure 4C), which sediment in response to
gravity, strongly suggesting these are gravity-perceiving cells. In
older stems with more extensive secondary growth, PIN3 ex-
pression could be found both in the endodermis as well as cells
within the secondary phloem (Figures 4D to 4I). Importantly, ac-
quisition of PIN3 expression by cells in secondary phloem iden-
tiﬁes a mechanism by which the woody stems can continue to
perceive and respond to gravity after the loss of the endodermal
layer during long-term secondary growth. Following 4 d of
gravistimulation, PIN3 preferentially localized toward the ground
in both the tension wood (Figures 4D to 4F; quantiﬁed for all
genotypes in Supplemental Figure 6) and opposite wood sides of
stems (Figures 4G to 4I). Because the PIN3-expressing cells are
peripheral to the cambium in the radial organization of the stem,
auxin would thus be predicted to be transported toward the
cambial zone on the tension wood side of the stem, but toward the
cortex (away from the cambium) on the opposite wood side of
the stem. Thus, lateral auxin transport toward the ground by
PIN3-expressing cells could elicit differential growth responses
of the cambium to gravistimulation on the upper (tension wood)
versus lower (opposite wood) sides of the stem.
GA Potentiates Auxin Response and ARK2-Dependent
Fiber Production
Previous reports have identiﬁed GA metabolism genes as direct
targets of KNOX transcription factors (Bolduc and Hake, 2009;
Hay and Tsiantis, 2010), and GA has been shown to affect the
differentiation of ﬁbers during wood development (Eriksson et al.,
2000; Mauriat and Moritz, 2009). The effect of GA treatment on
auxin responses during graviresponse and tension wood for-
mation was assayed through expression of a DR5:GUS construct
Figure 2. Immunolocalizations with JIM14 Antibody to Reveal Differences in Timing of Arabinogalactan Protein Epitope Development in Developing
G-Layers among ARK2 Genotypes.
(A) miRNA-ARK2.
(B) The wild type.
(C) OE-ARK2.
In each panel, redsignaloriginates from JIM14labeling,while blue signal isUV autoﬂuorescence from ligniﬁed cellwalls. Insetboxes show magniﬁed view of
position where ﬁrst JIM14-labeled G-layer occurs for each genotype, which is quantiﬁed in Supplemental Figure 1D. cz, cambial zone; gl, G-layer; sp,
secondary phloem, tw, tension wood. Bars = 200 µm.
Table 1. Tension Wood Fiber Production and Maturation in ARK2
Genotypes
Genotype
Fibers
Produceda
Fibers per
Dayb
Fibers to
G-Layer
Maturationc
Days for
G-Layer
Maturationd
miRNA-
ARK2
76.3 (SE 6.2)
5.5
36.4 (SE 6.3)
6.6
Wild type
74.4 (SE 4.7)
5.3
26.0 (SE 1.8)
4.9
OE-ARK2
33.8 (SE 2.3)
2.4
8.7 (SE 1.8)
3.6
Measurements were made for a minimum of three plants per genotype
after 14 d of gravistimulation.
aAverage number of tension wood ﬁbers within a cell ﬁle.
bAverage number of tension wood ﬁbers produced per day.
cAverage number of tension wood ﬁbers between the cambium and the
ﬁrst ﬁber with G-layer with JIM14 immunoﬂuorescence signal, a proxy for
G-layer maturation.
dAverage number of days for tension wood ﬁber G-layer to mature, as
assayed by JIM14 immunoﬂuorescence.
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2803

that reports auxin response (Spicer et al., 2013) in trees subjected
to a soil drench GA treatment (29 µm in soil; see Methods). In
upright trees, DR5:GUS expression was detected in the cambial
zone of trees after GA treatment but not in control trees
(Supplemental Figure 7). In untreated trees gravistimulated for 4 d,
the GUS reporter staining was weakly apparent in the cambial
zone of the tension wood side of the stem, while stronger staining
was apparent in the cortex in the opposite wood side of the stem
(Figures 5A and 5C). This staining pattern was enhanced in re-
sponse to GA treatment (Figures 5B and 5D). Notably, the en-
dodermis appeared to be a boundary for GUS staining in the
opposite wood side of the stem (Figure 5E), consistent with en-
dodermal PIN3 directing auxin ﬂow toward the cambium on the
tension wood side and toward the cortex on the opposite wood
side of the stem after gravistimulation. These results also show
that increased GA levels potentiate the auxin responsiveness of
these same tissues and are reminiscent of GA regulation of PIN
protein stability and localization that has been described for root
gravitropism in Arabidopsis (Willige et al., 2011; Löfke et al., 2013).
The effect of GA on tension wood ﬁber development was tested
by treating wild-type, OE-ARK2, and miRNA-ARK2 trees with
a soil drench of either water (control) or 29 mM GA. Trees treated
with GA showed an increase in gravibending response in com-
parison to controls (Supplemental Figure 7C). GA modestly in-
creased the number of tension wood ﬁbers formed after 2 weeks
gravibending for wild-type and OE-ARK2 trees (Supplemental
Figure 7D). By contrast, the number of ﬁbers produced by control
and GA-treated miRNA-ARK2 trees did not vary and was similar to
thatfoundinGA-treatedwild-typetrees(SupplementalFigure7D).
The maturation of G layers as assayed by JIM14 labeling
(Supplemental Figure 8) and XET labeling (Supplemental Figure 9)
showed similar trends, with GA treatment modestly increasing the
rate of maturation in the wild type and OE-ARK2 but having no
signiﬁcant effect in miRNA-ARK2. Together, these observations
suggestthatGAstimulatestensionwoodﬁberproductionandthat
this effect is sensitive to ARK2 levels, consistent with negative
regulation of GA levels by ARK2 and elevated endogenous levels
of GA in miRNA-ARK2.
Transcriptional Networks Associate Gene Expression with
Wood Development
Inaﬁnalsetofexperiments, computationalapproacheswereused
to model the transcriptional regulation of tension wood de-
velopment using genome-wide transcriptome data from trees in
which gene expression had been perturbed by gravistimulation,
GA treatment, and modulation of ARK2 expression. A full factorial
experiment was performed with trees of wild-type, miRNA-ARK2,
and OE-ARK2 genotypes subjected to either GA or a control
(mock) treatment and then either gravistimulated or allowed to
remain upright. After 2 d, developing xylem was lightly scraped
from both tension wood and opposite wood from gravistimulated
trees after debarking or from two opposing sides of the upright
trees and subjected to RNA sequencing (see Methods). Differ-
ential transcript abundance was calculated for comparisons of
wood types, genotypes, and GA treatment, with relatively large
numbers of genes showing differential expression in each com-
parison(SupplementalFigure10).Notably,comparisonoftranscript
levels across wood types revealed a massive reprogramming of
gene expression in opposite wood, with the majority of differentially
expressed genes being upregulated in that tissue (Supplemental
Figure 10).
Next, weighted gene correlation network analyses (Langfelder
and Horvath, 2008) were performed to deﬁne modules (clusters)
of coexpressed genes whose transcript levels covaried across
samples. Modules were initially characterized for robustness
by repeated random sampling and recalculation of modules
(Supplemental Figure 11A) and by calculating coexpression
Figure 3. In Situ Imaging of XET Activity in G-Layers to Reveal Differences in Timing of Developing G-Layers among ARK2 Genotypes.
(A) XET activity in miRNA-ARK2.
(B) XET activity in the wild type.
(C) XET activity in OE_ARK2.
In each panel, red signal originates from ﬂuorescent XET substrate XXXG-SR incorporation, while blue signal is UV autoﬂuorescence from cell walls. Inset
boxes show magniﬁed view of position where XET labeling ﬁrst occurs in G-layers for each ARK2 genotype. cz, cambial zone; sp, secondary phloem; xy,
secondary xylem. Bars = 100 µm.
2804
The Plant Cell

relationships among all combinations of modules (Supplemental
Figure 11B). Modules were next annotated to describe the ex-
pression and functional properties of genes within modules and
their correlations to traits of interest (Supplemental Data Set 1). As
visualized by eigengene values (the ﬁrst principal component of
transcript proﬁles) for each module (Figure 6A), variation in tran-
script levels across wood types was the primary factor in deﬁning
gene coexpression modules, followed by GA treatment and to
a lesser extent ARK2 genotype. Coexpression relationships
acrossmodules(SupplementalFigure11B)wereevidentbasedon
eigengene values; for example, the sister brown, black, pink, and
yellow modules were characterized by tension wood expression,
while the sister magenta, blue, green-yellow, purple, and red
modules were characterized by opposite wood expression
(Figure 6A). Correlations were calculated between each gene
module and phenotypic traits, including ARK2 genotype, wood
type, GA treatment, and wood phenotypes (microﬁbril angle,
cellulose crystallinity, ﬁber morphology, lignin, and carbohydrates;
Supplemental Figure 12). Interestingly, signiﬁcant correlations
were found between each trait and at least one gene module
(Figure 6A). All ﬁve gene modules with signiﬁcant correlations to
GA treatment (brown, yellow, magenta, blue, and red) were also
correlated withARK2genotype,andfourwerealsocorrelated with
woodtype.However,ofthethreemodules(brown,black,andpink)
showing signiﬁcant correlations with microﬁbril angle and cellu-
lose crystallinity traits associated with functional tension wood
ﬁbers, only brown showed signiﬁcant correlation with GA, sug-
gesting that the role of GA may be more closely tied to stimulation
of tension wood ﬁber production than regulation of cell wall
properties. Modules were also identiﬁed that had signiﬁcant en-
richmentforspeciﬁcGeneOntology(GO)categories(Supplemental
Figure 11C and Supplemental Data Set 2), allowing further insight
into the functional properties of modules. For example, each of the
modules characterized by tension wood expression had distinct
GO enrichment proﬁles, with the brown module characterized by
enrichment for “localization,” the black module enrichment for
Figure 4. Polar Auxin Transport Differences among ARK2 Genotypes and Primary Graviresponse through Relocalization of PIN3 Auxin Transport Proteins.
(A) Quantiﬁcation of apical to basal auxin transport in stems of ARK2 genotypes, showing faster transport in miRNA-ARK2 and slower transport in OE-ARK2
in comparison to wild-type controls.
(B) Immunolocalization with PIN3 antibody, showing labeling of the endodermis layer in the cortex of this younger, upright stem.
(C) Lugol staining of starch showing staining in the endodermis and secondary phloem (arrows) of cells containing starch-ﬁlled amyloplasts (inset).
(D) to (F) Immunolocalization of PIN3 in endodermal and secondary phloem cells on the tension wood side of a wild-type stem gravistimulated for 4 d.
g indicates the gravity vector. Bright-ﬁeld (D), PIN3 signal (F), and merged (E).
(G) to (I) Immunolocalization of PIN3 in endodermal and secondary phloem cells on the opposite wood side of a wild-type stem gravistimulated for 4 d.
g indicates the gravity vector. Bright-ﬁeld (G), PIN3 signal (I), and merged (H).
co, cortex; en, endodermis; sp, secondary phloem; xy, xylem. Bars = 500 µm in (B) and (C) and 50 µm in (D) to (I).
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2805

replication, the pink module for hormone, auxin, and cell wall, and
yellow module for cell wall, meristem, and localization GO terms.
Together, these annotations can be used to develop and test new
hypotheses regarding the function of ARK2, response to GA, or
tension wood development through the identiﬁcation and further
dissection of gene modules of interest, as illustrated below.
ARK2 was placed in the blue module and showed modest
connectivity within that as well as several other modules
(Supplemental Data Set 1). ARK2 binding was recently evaluated,
genome-wide, using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
(ChIP-seq) (Liu et al., 2015). Here, four modules (brown, black,
yellow, and magenta) showed enrichment for genes bound by
ARK2 (Figure 6A). All of the ARK2 binding enriched modules also
showed correlations with wood type and three showed correla-
tions with GA treatment (brown, yellow, and magenta) and/or
genotype (brown, yellow, and magenta), reﬂecting our experi-
mental data indicating that ARK2 and GA interact and have major
effects on wood development. Together, the modest connectivity
of ARK2 and binding to large numbers of genes of diverse function
suggest that this transcription factor does not act as a “master
regulator.” Instead, these data are more consistent with ARK2
acting as a transcription factor that inﬂuences and potentially
integrates multiple development-related processes, including cell
wall development and hormone-related functions.
As an example of how coexpression modules can be further
dissected to understand tension wood development, we focused
on the pink module, which is characterized by expression in
tension wood across all genotypes (Figure 6A) and has correla-
tions with cellulose crystallinity and microﬁbril angle that are
correlated with tension wood development and function (Figure
6A; Supplemental Figure 12). When genes within this module were
plotted relative to their correlation with wood type and module
membership (a measure of connectivity within the module),
several FLA-like genes that are markers of tension wood de-
velopment (Lafarguette et al., 2004; Andersson-Gunneras et al.,
2006; Azri et al., 2014) and reﬂected in our JIM14 labeling of
tension wood G-layers (Figure 2) were identiﬁed in the upper
quartileofbothtraits(blackdatapointsinFigure6B;Supplemental
Data Set 1), suggesting this module contains genes directly rel-
evant to differentiating tension wood. Strikingly, the transcription
factors within the module (red data points in Figure 6B) include
11 MYB, 6 NAC, and 2 KNOX transcription factors incorporating
orthologs of characterized genes known to regulate meristematic
growth (Zhou et al., 2009), ﬁber development, and/or secondary
cell wall biosynthesis in Arabidopsis (e.g., MYB52 and MYB85,
KNAT6 and KNAT7, BLH4 and VND1; Belles-Boix et al., 2006;
Ragni et al., 2008; Zhong et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2014; Taylor-
Teeples et al., 2015). These serve as excellent candidates for
regulating the expression of other genes within the module
(Supplemental Data Set 1), which include genes central to gravi-
response and tension wood formation, including auxin (e.g., PIN1
and PIN3 orthologs), GA biosynthesis (GA20-Oxidase), and cell
wall biosynthesis (e.g., IRREGULAR XYLEM genes and 19 FLAs).
Finally, potential radial signaling-related genes with high wood
type and module membership also reside in the pink module,
including CLE13-like and SCARECROW-like 8.
FLA Expression Reveals Differential GA Response across
Wood Types and ARK Genotypes
Looking in detail at the expression of the FLAs within the pink
module, three trends are apparent (Figure 6C): (1) FLA transcript
levels are highest in tension wood and lowest in opposite wood in
all genotypes (t = 15.304, df = 18, P value = 4.603e-12), (2) FLA
transcript levels are lower in the tension wood of miRNA-ARK2
than the wild type or OE-ARK2 (t = 212.764, df = 18, P value =
9.284e-11), and (3) FLA transcript levels show ARK2-dependent
differential expression in response to GA treatment in tension
wood and opposite wood (P values < 0.001). Speciﬁcally, FLA
Figure 5. Effects of GA on Auxin Response Measured by DR5:GUS.
Auxin response assayed by the DR5:GUS reporter for tension wood and
oppositewoodforwatercontrolorGA-treatedtrees.co,cortex;cz,cambial
zone;en,endodermis;pf,phloem ﬁbers;xy,secondaryxylem.Bars= 200µm
in (A) to (D) and 50 µm in (E).
(A) Water control, tension wood.
(B) GA-treated, tension wood.
(C) Water control, opposite wood.
(D) GA-treated, opposite wood.
(E) DR5:GUS expression in the endodermis of opposite wood for a water
control tree.
2806
The Plant Cell

levels are induced by GA treatment in tension wood for OE-ARK2
and the wild type, but miRNA-ARK2 shows repression of FLA
transcript levels by GA. These results are reminiscent of the re-
sponses of these same genotypes to GA treatment withregards to
maturation of G-layers as assayed by JIM14 immunolocalization
(Supplemental Figure 8). Additionally, FLA levels are repressed by
GA in opposite wood of wild-type and miRNA-ARK2 trees, but
increased by GA in opposite wood of OE-ARK2. Thus, the re-
sponse to GA is different across both wood types and ARK2
genotypes, potentially revealing a developmental switch set in
Figure 6. Transcriptional Network Regulating Wood Formation and Associations with Phenotypes.
(A)Dendrogramshowingrelationshipsofgenemodules(colors),correlationsofindividualgenemoduleswithphenotypes,andmoduleeigengeneexpressionacross
ARK2genotypes(miRNA, miRNA-ARK2;OE,OE-ARK2) andwoodtypes (NW,normal wood;OW,oppositewood; TW,tensionwood) inresponsetoGA treatment.
(B) Plotofgenes inthepinkmodule for differentialexpression acrosswoodtypes (yaxis) andmodule membership/connectivity(x axis).Black datapointsare
FLA genes. Red data points are transcription factor-encoding genes.
(C)Linegraphsshowingtheaverage(boldline)andindividualtranscriptlevels(graylines)ofthe19FLAgenesinthepinkmoduleacrossARK2genotypesand
wood types in response to GA treatment.
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2807

place by the initial graviresponse and radial auxin transport that is
sensitive to ARK2 transcript levels.
DISCUSSION
The negative gravitropism of woody angiosperm stems is
fundamentally different from that of herbaceous stems. The
herbaceous stem achieves negative gravitropism through
differential growth on the bottom of the stem that pushes the
stem upward. By contrast, the woody stem undergoes differ-
ential growth on the top of the stem to produce tension wood
that pulls the stem upward with contractile forces (Sinnott,
1952; Wilson and Archer, 1977; Ruelle, 2014). In this study, we
identiﬁed key regulatory mechanisms involved in negative
gravitropic responses in woody Populus stems, including the
cells responsible for graviperception, the initial graviresponse
via relocalization of the PIN3 auxin transporter, and interacting
roles for auxin, GA, and the ARK2 transcription factor in reg-
ulating ﬁber development and gravibending.
Using Populus as a model species, we found that gravi-
perception likely occurs directly in the woody stem in specialized
cells containing starch-ﬁlled amyloplasts that sediment toward
the ground. These cells are further deﬁned by expression of the
auxintransport protein, PIN3,whichrelocalizestoward theground
during gravistimulation. The PIN3-expressing cells are initially
found in the endodermis, similar to what has been found in
Arabidopsis (Friml et al., 2002) and other herbaceous stems, but
later in development cells within the secondary phloem acquire
PIN3 expression and possess amyloplasts. Thus, even though
the endodermis is eventually lost during the outward expansion
of the cortex during secondary growth, older woody stems can
continue to sense gravity as new cells within the secondary
phloem acquire PIN3 expression. Importantly, the reorientation
of PIN3 toward the ground in gravistimulated woody stems
would be predicted to have different outcomes on auxin
transport in the top versus bottom of the stem. Because of the
radial organization of the stem, on the top (tension wood side) of
a gravistimulated stem PIN3 orientation is toward the cambium
and center of the stem, whereas in the bottom (opposite wood
side) of the stem PIN3 orientation is toward the cortex and
periphery of the stem. These orientations are reﬂected in ex-
pression of a DR5:GUS reporter in our experiments, which
shows preferential cambial expression on the top and cortical
expression in the bottom of gravistimulated stems. This lateral
auxin transport and response represents the earliest known
graviresponse of woody stems and provides an obvious initial
mechanism triggering the different developmental fates of
xylem tissues that develop on the top (tension wood) versus
bottom (opposite wood) of the gravistimulated stem.
Our results concerning the location of graviperceptive cells and
radial auxin transport in the tension wood versus opposite wood
side of gravistimulated stems may also help in understanding
previous, apparently conﬂicting, research results. Exogenous
application of auxin to the upper surface of a leaning stem resulted
in inhibition of tension wood formation (Cronshaw and Morey,
1968), while application of antiauxins induces tension wood
(Cronshaw and Morey, 1965). These results led to the proposition
that low auxin levels in the cambium induce tension wood
development. However, direct measurement of auxin in gravi-
stimulated Populus stems did not detect lower levels in cambia
producing tension wood in comparison to cambia in upright
trees; in fact, signiﬁcantly lower auxin levels were found for
cambia producing opposite wood (Hellgren et al., 2004). Our
results would suggest that exogenous auxin application could
likely mimic the conditions in the opposite wood side of the stem,
where auxin transport would result in higher auxin and auxin
response in the cortex than the cambial zone. The lower levels of
auxin reported for the cambial region on the bottom of the stem
(producing opposite wood) are consistent with auxin transport
away from the cambium, as suggested by PIN3 localization and
theDR5:GUSreporter in ourexperiments.However, theprevious
observation that levels of auxin in cambia producing tension
wood are not higher than those for cambia producing normal
wood (Hellgren et al., 2004) may indicate that it is not necessarily
the absolute concentration of auxin in the cambial zone that
determines the type of wood produced by the cambium. Instead,
the relative amounts of auxin across the radially arranged sec-
ondary vascular tissues or differential sensitivity of auxin across
these tissues may be more important. It is also possible that
auxin itself is not directly inducing the different developmental
outcomes at the cambial zone, but rather is involved in gener-
ating the signals that more directly elicit the developmental
changes.
Auxin is not the only hormone inﬂuencing wood development,
and we found GA to be an important hormonal regulator of tension
wood, capable of stimulating ﬁber production and gravibending.
Interestingly, previous authors have also attributed positive reg-
ulation of tension wood development to GA and speculated,
based on gene expression anddirect measurement of GA,that GA
precursors may be synthesized in the phloem and transported to
thexylem,potentiallythoughrays(Israelssonetal.,2005).Therays
interconnect the secondary xylem (wood), cambium, and sec-
ondary phloem (Lev-Yudan and Aloni, 1995) and, although their
role in development is poorly understood, could be important in
radial signaling in woody stems. For example, radial movement of
auxin from the primary vascular bundles to the cambial zone has
been demonstrated in Populus and likely involves the rays (Spicer
et al., 2013). Strikingly, ectopic application of GA can induce
tension wood formation (Nakamura et al., 1994), making it a good
candidate for a more direct signal controlling differentiation
downstream of auxin. We found that transcriptional responses to
GA treatment were sensitive to ARK2 transcript levels and that, in
contrast with wild-type or ARK2 overexpressing trees, trees with
reduced ARK2 transcript abundance failed to produce additional
tension wood ﬁbers in response to GA treatment. These results
would be consistent with the idea that decreased levels of ARK2
transcript are associated with elevated GA levels, similar to pre-
viousworkin herbaceous speciesthathavedemonstrated adirect
positive regulation of GA catabolism-related and negative regu-
lation of GA biosynthesis-related genes by Class I KNOX tran-
scription factors (Sakamoto et al., 2001; Jasinski et al., 2005;
Bolduc and Hake, 2009). In addition, we found thatGA potentiated
the expression of the auxin-responsive DR5:GUS reporter in
gravistimulated stems. This result is reminiscent of previous
studies in trees showing GA stimulation of polar auxin transport
during wood development (Bjorklund et al., 2007) and of reports of
2808
The Plant Cell

GA regulation of PIN protein stability and localization during root
gravitropism in Arabidopsis (Willige et al., 2011; Löfke et al., 2013).
Additionally, we found evidence that ﬁber production can be
genetically decoupled from the maturation of cell walls competent
of generating contractile force. We imaged two molecular markers
of functional tension wood G-layers: JIM14 immunolocalization of
arabinogalactan proteins (including FLAs) and XET in gravi-
stimulated stems of wild-type trees and trees with increased or
decreased ARK2 transcripts. Stems with decreased ARK2 tran-
script abundance produce more ﬁbers but are delayed in ﬁber
maturation (as assayed by Jim14 and XET labeling) and display
reduced gravibending. Stems with increased ARK2 transcripts
produce fewer ﬁbers, but ﬁber maturation and gravibending are
enhanced. Thus, force generation and gravibending can be ge-
netically decoupled from ﬁber differentiation, per se. While we
expect that the dramatic differences in ﬁber maturation among
ARK2 genotypes is a primary factor, undoubtedly other differ-
ences such as stem stiffness also contribute to the observed
differences in gravibending among these genotypes.
We used GA treatment, ARK2 transcript levels, and gravi-
stimulation as perturbations of gene expression to model gene
coexpression networks underlying tension wood formation. An
unexpected ﬁnding using comparisons of differentially expressed
gene transcripts across all treatments was that opposite wood
undergoes a massive reprogramming of gene expression. While
typically assumed to play a passive role in gravibending, these
results suggest the possibility of an active role, perhaps through
production of signals or metabolic contributions to gravitropism.
To more fully extract information from the transcriptome data,
gene modules were deﬁned based on gene coexpression across
wood types, genotypes, and GA treatments. Each module was
annotated and characterized based on correlations with wood
phenotypes, GA response, ARK2 binding to genes within speciﬁc
modules, correlations with wood properties, and enrichment of
member genes in speciﬁc gene ontology categories. These an-
notations allowed us to not only identify gene modules of interest
forfurther study,butalsodeﬁnerelationshipsamong modules and
make inferences about mechanisms regulating xylem de-
velopment. For example, of the three modules showing signiﬁcant
correlations with microﬁbril angle and cellulose crystallinity (traits
strongly associated with tension wood), only two were correlated
with GA treatment, potentially reﬂecting our experimental data
showing the primary effect of GA was in promoting ﬁber de-
velopment but not cell wall development. We were also able to
dissect modules based on annotations, module membership
(a measure of connectivity of a gene with other genes in the
module), and differential expression across treatments. For
example, ARK2 showed only modest connectivity and differ-
ential expression across wood types. Along with the obser-
vation that ARK2 binds to large numbers of genes of diverse
function, these properties suggest that ARK2 is not a “master
regulator” but rather inﬂuences the expression of genes of
different function, potentially to integrate different developmental
processes. This would be consistent with reports of KNOX
genes regulating both hormone-related as well as cell wall-
related genes in other model species (Sakamoto et al., 2001;
Mele et al., 2003; Jasinski et al., 2005; Bolduc and Hake, 2009;
Bolduc et al., 2012).
The interaction of GA and ARK2 in regulating tension wood
developmentwasevidentnot onlyinexperimentaldata,butalsoin
coexpression analyses. A coexpression module was selected for
dissection that showed signiﬁcant correlations with tension wood
properties and contained a large number of FLAs implicated in the
tension wood development and function (Lafarguette et al., 2004;
Andersson-Gunneras et al., 2006; Azri et al., 2014). Interestingly,
the expression of these FLA genes was differential across both
wood types and ARK2 genotypes in response to GA, similar to
what we observed in response to GA treatment of ﬁber production
and maturation across ARK2 genotypes. Taken together, these
results are consistent with ARK2 negatively regulating GA levels,
as has been reported in other species (Sakamoto et al., 2001; Hay
et al., 2002; Bolduc and Hake, 2009), but also having an additional
role in regulating cell differentiation and cell wall biosynthesis.
In conclusion, the results from these studies not only provide
insights into the regulation of gravitropism and wood formation in
angiosperm trees, but also demonstrate that the combination of
experimental and computational approaches can be used to
dissect complex developmental traits in these long-lived organ-
isms. Challenges for future studies include determining the
evolutionary relationships of graviperception and graviresponse
mechanisms in woody versus herbaceous stems and roots and
whetherthe mechanismsdescribed hereforPopulusalsofunction
across the amazing diversity of angiosperm tree species.
METHODS
Replication
In all experiments, a minimum of three biological replicates were included
for each treatment.
Plant Growth
The genetic background of all trees utilized is hybrid aspen (Populus alba 3
Populus tremula) clone INRA 717-IB4. Representative ARK2 transgenic
genotypes were selected from those previously described and charac-
terized (Du et al., 2009). The creation and characterization of the DR5:GUS
reporterlinewascharacterizedandreportedpreviously(Spiceretal.,2013).
Plants were grown at ;22°C under continuous light provided by Philips
TL830 and TL850 ﬂuorescent bulbs. Plants used for time-lapse movies,
immunolocalizations, XET labeling, GUS expression assays, and histology
were transferred to soil (Sunshine Mix 4; SunGro Horticulture) in 0.5-liter
pots, covered by a transparent lid (Super Sprouter), and adjusted to am-
bient humidity over the course of 2 weeks. Plants were used for experi-
ments after 2 months growth in soil with water supplemented with Miracle
Grow fertilizer using the concentration recommended bythe manufacturer.
For GA soil drench treatments, 50 mL of 0.01% GA (Sigma-Aldrich G-7645)
in water was added to each pot to give an approximate concentration of
29 µmol GA in the soil. Plants were grown for four additional days after GA
treatment prior to gravistimulation.
Histology, Imaging, and Auxin Transport Measurement
Time-lapse movies were captured using Wingscape time-lapse digital
cameras (Wingscapes; EBSCO Industries). Plants were positioned hori-
zontally and imaged once every 10 min on the ﬁrst day and then once per
hour for 2 weeks. Quantiﬁcation of stem lift and curvature was analyzed
using custom R scripts, using data derived from digitized tracings of stems
from individual frames taken from time-lapse movies. Tracings analyzed
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2809

werefromthebaseofthestemtotheapexofcurvature(deﬁnedasthebasal
point of tropism of the primary, herbaceous portion of the stem).
Stems were sectioned for histology using a Vibratome Series 1000
(Heath Company) to a thickness of 50 to 100 µm. Sections for anatomical
assays were stained with astra blue and phloroglucinol (Ruzin, 1999) and
visualized with a Leica DMB compound microscope using a Leica
DFC450C digital camera with live image stitching using Leica Live
Image Builder software.
For XET activity visualization, XXXG-SR was synthesized as previously
described (Nishikubo et al., 2007). The previously described labeling
protocol (Nishikubo et al., 2007) was modiﬁed by utilizing Vibratome
sections rather than hand-sections and by blocking sections (25 mM MES,
pH 5.5, 1% BSA, and 2% ﬁsh gelatin) prior to incubation with 4 µg/mL
XXXG-SR in block. For estimation of background signal, sections were
boiled for 10 min prior to blocking and incubation with XXXG-SR. After
overnight incubation at room temperature, sections were rinsed four times
with 25 mM MES and then stepped gradually into a wash solution of 15:1:4
ethanol:formic acid:water. After multiple changes of wash solutions,
sectionsweresteppedback to25mMMESprior toimaging on aZeiss LSM
710 confocal microscope.
The Pt-PIN3 antibody was raised against a conjugated peptide
(DQREKEGPTGLNKLGSS-C) unique to paralogous Populus PIN3-like
proteins Potri.008G129400 and Potri.010G112800 in rabbits and used at
a dilution of 1:250. To assay speciﬁcity of the antibody, membrane proteins
wereextracted frombothleaf andstem tissuesofP.alba3P.tremulaclone
INRA 717-IB4. Tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen and suspended in
an extraction buffer before extraction as previously described (Abas and
Luschnig, 2010). Resulting pellets were frozen at 280°C and then thawed
and subjected to a second extraction using transmembrane protein ex-
traction reagent (FIVEphoton Biochemicals) according to the manu-
facturer’s protocol.
Immunolocalizations were performed using Vibratome stem sections
that were ﬁxed at room temperature in formalin, acetic acid, and alcohol for
45 min under vacuum. Sections were then stepped to PBT (13 PBS with
0.2% Tween 20) and washed four times 15 min each. Sections were then
blocked (13 PBS, 2% ﬁsh gelatin, 1% BSA, and 0.2% Tween 20) for 1 h
prior to addition of the primary antibody. The JIM14 antibody was obtained
from the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center (University of Georgia,
Athens, GA) and used at a dilution of 1:500. After overnight incubation at
4°C, sections were washed four times in 13 PBT, blocked for 1 h, and
probed with biotin-labeled antibodies (for JIM14, biotin-xx-goat-anti-rat
IgG, Life Technologies A10517; for Pt-PIN3 biotin-xx-goat-anti-rabbit IgG,
Life Technologies B2770) at 1:400 dilution. After overnight incubation at
4°C, sections were washed four times with PBT, blocked for 1 h, and 4 mL
Streptavidin Alexa Flour-488 (Life Technologies S11223) added per mil-
liliter of block. After 0.5 h incubation at room temperature, sections were
washed four times with PBT prior to visualization on a Zeiss LSM 710
confocal microscope.
GUS staining was performed on 100- to 150-µm thick sections by
vacuum inﬁltration of staining solution (100 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7,
10mMEDTA,0.1%TritonX-100,0.5mg/mLX-glucuronide,and100µg/mL
chloramphenicol) followed by overnight incubation at 37°. Sections were
cleared in 70% ethanol prior to imaging on a Leica DMLB compound
microscope with Leica DFC450C digital camera and live image stitching
using Leica Live Image Builder software.
Basipetal (toward the root) auxin transport was measured in stems of
poplar seedlings in tissue culture (Groover et al., 2006) using a radio-tracer
auxin transport assay adapted from Arabidopsis thaliana inﬂorescences
(Lewis and Muday, 2009). Developmentally matched seedlings with
consistent stem thickness were stripped of leaves and cut 20 and 40 mm
from the shoot apex, forming a 20-mm section. These samples were in-
verted and placed into an open 0.5-mL microcentrifuge tube containing
200 mL 100 nM 3H-IAA (24 Ci/mmol; American Radiochemical) such that
the apical cut end was submerged. Assay tubes were placed in a sealed
box ﬁlled with water to prevent evaporation. After 18 h, the seedlings were
removed and the apical 10 mm from the site of auxin application was
removedanddiscarded.Thenextremaining10-mmbasalsectionwasthen
divided into 2-mm segments and assayed for radioactivity in a Beckman
LS6500 scintillation counter. The average and SE of 3H-IAA in each sample
is reported relative to the distance to the apical end.
RNA-seq and ChIP-seq
Plants grown as described previously were transferred to 8-liter pots in
Sunshine Mix 4 (SunGro Horticulture) and grown in a greenhouse in Pla-
cerville, CA without supplemental light for 3 months. For GA soil drench
treatments, 0.01% GA in water was added to each pot to give an ap-
proximate concentration of 29 µm GA in the soil. Trees subjected to
gravistimulation were placed horizontally 4 d after GA treatments were
applied, and differentiating xylem for RNA-seq was harvested from all
plants 2 d after gravistimulation commenced. For gravistimulated trees,
bark was removed from the top (for tension wood) or bottom (for opposite
wood) quarter of the stem and differentiating xylem harvested by light
scraping with a sterile double-edged razor blade. For upright trees, the
stem was randomly divided in half, and two xylem samples were in-
dependently harvested from opposing sides. For all trees, xylem was
harvested from the twentieth leaf to the midpoint of the total length of the
stem andﬂash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was isolated by grinding
the tissue to a ﬁne powder in liquid nitrogen, followed by extraction using
Trizol (Life Technologies) using the manufacturer’s suggested protocol.
RNA samples were then treated with RNase-free DNase (Qiagen) prior to
secondary isolation using the Qiagen RNeasy kit following the manu-
facturer’s protocol. Quality and quantity of RNA was assessed using Qubit
(Life Technologies) and Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies), respectively,
prior to generation of RNA-seq libraries using the Illumina TruSeq Library
Preparation Kit V2. Six samples were multiplexed into each lane of an
Illumina HiSeq run to produce 50-bp single-end reads. ARK2 ChIP-seq
data were produced and analyzed as previously described (Liu et al., 2015)
and are available as NCBI SRI accession SRP0533 or through popGENIE
(http://popgenie.org/).
Bioinformatics
For each RNA-seq library, contamination from adaptor sequences was
removed using scythe V0.95 (https://github.com/vsbuffalo/scythe), and
sequenced reads were trimmed using sickle (Joshi and Fass, 2011) with
default settings. Sequenced reads were then mapped to the Populus
genome assembly V3.0 (http://www.phytozome.net/poplar.php) using
TopHat v2.0.6 (Trapnell et al., 2009), and reads for Populus V3.0 gene
models were counted using HTseq (Trapnell et al., 2009) version 0.5.4p1.
Gene expression levels were calculated as reads per kilobase per million
reads using the TMM normalization method in the package edgeR V3.6.8
(Robinson et al., 2010). All statistical analyses were implemented in R
(R Development Core Team, 2014) unless stated otherwise.
Coexpression and module analyses were performed using functions
from the R package WGCNA V1.41-1 (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008)
and publically available scripts (http://labs.genetics.ucla.edu/horvath/
CoexpressionNetwork/Rpackages/WGCNA/). Brieﬂy, coexpression rela-
tionships between genes were summarized as an adjacency matrix and
raised to the soft threshold power of eight. The soft threshold power was
determined based on a greater 80% model ﬁt to scale-free topology and
low mean connectivity. Coexpression modules were deﬁned as clusters of
highly interconnected genes andcalculated using hierarchical clustering of
dissimilarity of the topological overlap measure. Hierarchical clustering
was performed using dynamic tree cutting with a minimum module size of
500 and a cut height of 0.998, and closely related modules (0.3) based on
module eigengene values were collapsed. Module stability was assessed
2810
The Plant Cell

by resampling 75% of the RNA-seq libraries and rerunning the coex-
pression analysis 20 times (Langfelder and Horvath, 2012).
Traits were related to modules using module eigengene values. Module
correlations for experimental treatments such as ARK2 genotype, wood
type, and GA treatments were tested using ANOVA, and wood chemistry
phenotypes were tested using Fisher’s exact tests. Enrichment of ARK2
ChIP-seq binding in coexpression modules was determined based on
a one-tailed hypergeometric distribution. Hub genes in the pink module
were identiﬁed as genes that had high gene signiﬁcance with wood type
and high module membership in the pink module. Gene signiﬁcance was
calculated as the correlation between gene expression (reads per kilobase
per million reads) and wood type. Module membership was calculated as
the correlation between gene expression and module eigengene values for
the pink module.
Functional enrichment of coexpression modules was based on GO
enrichment and calculated using Arabidopsis best BLAST hit of Populus
gene models. GO analysis was performed using Arabidopsis GO anno-
tations because categories related to relevant categories (including meri-
stem, shoot development, hormones, cell wall and cellulose) have limited
annotation in Populus. Analyses were performed using the Bioconductor
package GOstats V2.30.0 (Falcon and Gentleman, 2007) with P < 0.01.
Wood Chemistry and Cell Wall Phenotyping
A micro-Klason method was applied to quantify lignin and cell wall car-
bohydrates (Coleman et al., 2007). Approximately 200 mg of extracted,
oven-dried wood was reacted in a 125-mL serum bottle with 3 mL of 20°C
72% (w/w) sulfuric acid (H2SO4), with thorough mixing with a glass rod for
1minevery10min, followedby mixingfor15severy 10minthereafter. After
2 h, 112 mL deionized water was added to the reaction. The serum bottles
were then sealed and immediately autoclaved at 121°C for 60 min. Sugar
standards were subjected to the same treatment. Samples were allowed to
cool and settle at 4°C and were vacuum-ﬁltered through preweighed
medium coarseness (M) sintered-glass crucibles. Each sample was
washed (and the serum bottle also rinsed) with 200 mL warm (;50°C)
deionized water to remove residual acid and sugars and dried overnight at
105°C. The dry crucibles were reweighed to determine Klason lignin (acid-
insoluble lignin) gravimetrically. The ﬁltrate was then analyzed for acid-
soluble lignin by absorbance at 205 nm using a UV/Vis spectrometer.
Samples had to be diluted with 4% H2SO4 to reach an absorbance value
between 0.2 and 0.7. The concentrations for neutral cell wall-associated
carbohydrates (glucose, xylose, mannose, galactose, rhamnose, and
arabinose) in the hydrolyzate were determined using HPLC. Prior to in-
jection, samples were ﬁltered through 0.45-mm HV ﬁlters (Millipore). The
samples for HPLC runs were prepared by exact weights of ;950 mg
hydrolyzate + 50 mg fucose as the internal standard. The concentrations of
sugar monosaccharides were determined using a Dionex HPLC system
(DX-600) equipped with an ion exchange PA1 column (Dionex), a pulsed
amperometric detector with a gold electrode, and a SpectraAS3500 auto
injector (Spectra-Physics). The column was equilibrated with 250 mM
NaOH and eluted with deionized water at ﬂow rate of 1 mL/min. Total lignin
content was calculated as the sum of the Klason lignin and soluble lignin
fractions. Lignin and cell wall sugar content was determined as a per-
centage of dry wood, based on the initial weight of the extract-free wood
sample analyzed.
Microﬁbril angle and cell wall crystallinity were determined by x-ray
diffraction using a Bruker D8 Discover x-ray diffraction unit equipped with
an area array detector (GADDS) on the radial face of the wood section
precision cut (1.68 mm) from the growing stem isolated from the tension
wood and opposite wood sections isolated from 10 cm above the root
collar. Wide-angle diffraction was used in transmission mode, and the
measurements were performed with CuKa1 radiation (l = 1.54 Å), the x-ray
source ﬁt with a 0.5-mm collimator, and the scattered photon collected by
aGADDSdetector.Boththex-raysourceandthedetectorweresettou=0°
for microﬁbril angle determination, while the 2 u (source) was set to 17° for
wood crystallinity determination. The average T-value of the two 002
diffraction arc peaks was used for microﬁbril angle calculations, as per the
method of Ukrainetz et al. (2008), while crystallinity was determined by
mathematically ﬁtting the data using the method of Coleman et al. (2007).
Crystallinity measures were precalibrated by capturing diffractograms of
pure Acetobacterxylinumbacterial cellulose(known tobe 87%crystalline).
Fiber length was analyzed using the woody material isolated from the
tensionwoodandoppositewoodsideofeachspecimen,accordingtoPark
et al. (2008). In brief, each sample was macerated in a solution consisting of
30% hydrogen peroxide and glacial acetic acid in a 1:1 ratio (Franklin
solution) at 70°C for 48 h. Following the reaction, the remaining ﬁbrous
material was washed with deionized water until the samples were neu-
tralized. Subsamples were resuspended in 10 mL deionized, distilled water
and analyzed on a ﬁber quality analyzer (FQA; Optest Equipment). Fiber
length was recorded in millimeters.
Accession Numbers
The sequences associated with RNA-seq experiments are deposited in
NCBI SRA under BioProject PRJNA284622. The sequences associated
with ChIP-seq of ARK2 are deposited in NCBI SRA under accession
SRP0533. Phytozome accession numbers for Populus orthologs of Arabi-
dopsis genes discussed in reference to gene module dissection are as
follows: MYB52 (Potri.012G039400), MYB85 (Potri.015G129100), KNAT6
(Potri.010G043500), KNAT7 (Potri.001G112200), BLH4 (Potri.007G032700),
VND1 (Potri.007G014400), PIN1 (Potri.015G038700), PIN3 (Potri.015G038700
and Potri.008G129400), GA20-Oxidase (Potri.015G134600), IRREGULAR
XYLEM genes (Potri.004G117200, Potri.009G042500, and Potri.001G248700),
CLE13-like (Potri.008G115600), and SCARECROW-like 8 (Potri.004G078800).
Supplemental Data
Supplemental Figure 1. Quantiﬁcation of gravitropic bending and
longitudinal growth in ARK2 genotypes during a 2-week gravistimulus
trial.
Supplemental Figure 2. Opposite wood histology.
Supplemental Figure 3. JIM14 immunolocalization of arabinogalactan
protein epitopes in opposite wood of ARK2 genotypes and negative
control showing background labeling.
Supplemental Figure 4. Imaging of XET activity in opposite wood of
ARK2 genotypes.
Supplemental Figure 5. PIN3 and control immunolocalization.
Supplemental Figure 6. PIN3 quantiﬁcation in tension wood and
localization in opposite wood.
Supplemental Figure 7. GA effects on DR5:GUS expression in upright
stems and on gravibending in ARK2 genotypes.
Supplemental Figure 8. JIM14 immunolocalization for stem sections
of trees treated with GA.
Supplemental Figure 9. In situ imaging of XET activity in stems of
trees treated with GA.
Supplemental Figure 10. Differential expression of genes in opposite
wood versus tension wood and normal wood.
Supplemental Figure 11. Characterization of gene coexpression
network modules.
Supplemental Figure 12. Quantiﬁcation of wood property and
chemistry traits for wood types within each ARK2 genotype.
Supplemental Movie 1. Time-lapse movie of wild-type poplar un-
dergoing gravitropic bending.
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2811

Supplemental Movie 2. Time-lapse movie of OE-ARK2 poplar un-
dergoing gravitropic bending.
Supplemental Movie 3. Time-lapse movie of miRNA-ARK2 poplar
undergoing gravitropic bending.
Supplemental Data Set 1. Gene module memberships and statistics
for poplar genes expressed during wood formation.
Supplemental Data Set 2. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for
gene modules.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Grants 2011-67013-30062 and 2015-67013-
22891 from USDA AFRI to A.G. and V.F. M.Z. is supported by NSF Postdoc-
toral Research Fellowship in Biology Grant IOS-1402064. G.K.M. was
supported by NASA Grant NNX09AK82G. This work used the Vincent
J. Coates Genomics Sequencing Laboratory at UC Berkeley, supported by
NIH S10 Instrumentation Grants S10RR029668 and S10RR027303. We
thank Courtney Castle and Annie Mix for assistance in plant propagation and
care.WethankJulinMaloof,DanielFulop,andChristinePalmerforguidanceon
computational analyses of stem movements.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.G., S.G., and V.F. conceived of this research program. S.G. performed
time-lapse videos, immunolocalizations, Lugol staining, GUS staining, his-
tology, and ﬁber counts. M.Z. performed bioinformatics analyses with
guidance from V.F., A.G., S.G., and M.Z. performed RNA-seq experiments.
S.D.M. andF.H.contributed wood chemistry, ultrastructure, andﬁberdata.
G.K.M. and D.R.L. contributed auxin transport assays. F.M.I. and H.B.
synthesized the XET substrate. A.G. performed XET imaging and wrote the
article.
Received June 15, 2015; revised August 24, 2015; accepted September 4,
2015; published September 28, 2015.
REFERENCES
Abas, L., and Luschnig, C. (2010). Maximum yields of microsomal-
type membranes from small amounts of plant material without re-
quiring ultracentrifugation. Anal. Biochem. 401: 217–227.
Andersson-Gunnerås, S., Hellgren, J.M., Björklund, S., Regan, S.,
Moritz, T., and Sundberg, B. (2003). Asymmetric expression of a poplar
ACC oxidase controls ethylene production during gravitational induction
of tension wood. Plant J. 34: 339–349.
Andersson-Gunneras, S., Mellerowicz, E.J., Love, J., Segerman, B.,
Ohmiya, Y., Coutinho, P.M., Nilsson, P., Henrissat, B., Moritz, T., and
Sundberg, B. (2006). Biosynthesis of cellulose-enriched tension wood in
Populus: global analysis of transcripts and metabolites identiﬁes bio-
chemical and developmental regulators in secondary wall biosynthesis.
Plant J. 45: 144–165.
Azri, W., Ennajah, A., Nasr, Z., Woo, S.Y., and Khaldi, A. (2014).
Transcriptome proﬁling the basal region of poplar stems during the
early gravitropic response. Biol. Plant. 58: 55–63.
Belles-Boix, E., Hamant, O., Witiak, S.M., Morin, H., Traas, J., and
Pautot, V. (2006). KNAT6: An Arabidopsis homeobox gene involved
in meristem activity and organ separation. Plant Cell 18: 1900–1907.
Bjorklund, S., Antti, H., Uddestrand, I., Moritz, T., and Sundberg, B.
(2007). Cross-talk between gibberellin and auxin in development of
Populus wood: gibberellin stimulates polar auxin transport and has
a common transcriptome with auxin. Plant J. 52: 499–511.
Bolduc, N., and Hake, S. (2009). The maize transcription factor
KNOTTED1 directly regulates the gibberellin catabolism gene ga2ox1.
Plant Cell 21: 1647–1658.
Bolduc, N., Yilmaz, A., Mejia-Guerra, M.K., Morohashi, K., O’Connor,
D., Grotewold, E., and Hake, S. (2012). Unraveling the KNOTTED1
regulatory network in maize meristems. Genes Dev. 26: 1685–1690.
Chuck, G., Lincoln, C., and Hake, S. (1996). KNAT1 induces lobed
leaves with ectopic meristems when overexpressed in Arabidopsis.
Plant Cell 8: 1277–1289.
Clair, B., Alméras, T., Pilate, G., Jullien, D., Sugiyama, J., and Riekel, C.
(2011). Maturation stress generation in Poplar tension wood studied by
synchrotron radiation microdiffraction. Plant Physiol. 155: 562–570.
Clair, B., Almeras, T., Yamamoto, H., Okuyama, T., and Sugiyama, J.
(2006). Mechanical behavior of cellulose microﬁbrils in tension wood, in
relation with maturation sress generation. Biophys. J. 91: 1128–1135.
Coleman, H.D., Canam, T., Kang, K.Y., Ellis, D.D., and Mansﬁeld,
S.D. (2007). Over-expression of UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in
hybrid poplar affects carbon allocation. J. Exp. Bot. 58: 4257–4268.
Cronshaw, J., and Morey, P. (1968). The effect of plant growth
substances on the development of tension wood in horizontally
inclined stems of Acer rubrum seedlings. Protoplasma 65: 379–391.
Cronshaw, J., and Morey, P.R. (1965). Induction of tension wood by
2,3,5-tri-iodobenzoic acid. Nature 205: 816–818.
Déjardin, A., Leplé, J.C., Lesage-Descauses, M.C., Costa, G., and
Pilate, G. (2004). Expressed sequence tags from Poplar wood tis-
sues: A comparative analysis from multiple libraries. Plant Biol.
(Stuttg.) 6: 55–64.
Du, J., Mansﬁeld, S.D., and Groover, A.T. (2009). The Populus ho-
meobox gene ARBORKNOX2 regulates cell differentiation during
secondary growth. Plant J. 60: 1000–1014.
Eriksson, M.E., Israelsson, M., Olsson, O., and Moritz, T. (2000). In-
creased gibberellin biosynthesis in transgenic trees promotes growth,
biomass production and xylem ﬁber length. Nat. Biotechnol. 18: 784–788.
Falcon, S., and Gentleman, R. (2007). Using GOstats to test gene
lists for GO term association. Bioinformatics 23: 257–258.
Friml, J., Wisniewska, J., Benkova, E., Mendgen, K., and Palme, K.
(2002). Lateral relocation of auxin efﬂux regulator PIN3 mediates
tropism in Arabidopsis. Nature 415: 806–809.
Goswami, L., Dunlop, J.W.C., Jungnikl, K., Eder, M., Gierlinger, N.,
Coutand, C., Jeronimidis, G., Fratzl, P., and Burgert, I. (2008).
Stress generation in the tension wood of poplar is based on the
lateral swelling power of the G-layer. Plant J. 56: 531–538.
Groover, A., Mansﬁeld, S., DiFazio, S., Dupper, G., Fontana, J., Millar,
R., and Wang, Y. (2006). The Populus homeobox gene ARBORKNOX1
reveals overlapping mechanisms regulating the shoot apical meristem
and the vascular cambium. Plant Mol. Biol. 61: 917–932.
Hay, A., Kaur, H., Phillips, A., Hedden, P., Hake, S., and Tsiantis, M.
(2002). The gibberellin pathway mediates KNOTTED1-type homeobox
function in plants with different body plans. Curr. Biol. 12: 1557–1565.
Hay, A., and Tsiantis, M. (2010). KNOX genes: versatile regulators of
plant development and diversity. Development 137: 3153–3165.
Hellgren, J.M., Olofsson, K., and Sundberg, B. (2004). Patterns of
auxin distribution during gravitational induction of reaction wood in
poplar and pine. Plant Physiol. 135: 212–220.
Israelsson, M., Sundberg, B., and Moritz, T. (2005). Tissue-speciﬁc
localization of gibberellins and expression of gibberellin-biosynthetic
and signaling genes in wood-forming tissues in aspen. Plant J. 44:
494–504.
Jasinski, S., Piazza, P., Craft, J., Hay, A., Woolley, L., Rieu, I., Phillips,
A., Hedden, P., and Tsiantis, M. (2005). KNOX action in Arabidopsis is
2812
The Plant Cell

mediated by coordinate regulation of cytokinin and gibberellin activities.
Curr. Biol. 15: 1560–1565.
Joshi, N.A., and Fass, J.N. (2011). Sickle: A sliding-window, adaptive,
quality-based trimming tool for FastQ ﬁles (version 1.200). Available
at https://github.com/najoshi/sickle.
Knox, J.P., Linstead, P.J., Cooper, J.P.C., and Roberts, K. (1991). De-
velopmentally regulated epitopes of cell surface arabinogalactan proteins
and their relation to root tissue pattern formation. Plant J. 1: 317–326.
Lafarguette, F., Leplé, J.-C., Déjardin, A., Laurans, F., Costa, G.,
Lesage-Descauses, M.-C., and Pilate, G. (2004). Poplar genes
encoding fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins are highly ex-
pressed in tension wood. New Phytol. 164: 107–121.
Langfelder, P., and Horvath, S. (2008). WGCNA: an R package for
weighted correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9: 559.
Langfelder, P., and Horvath, S. (2012). Fast R functions for robust
correlations and hierarchical clustering. J. Stat. Softw. 46: i11.
Leach, R.W.A., and Wareing, P.F. (1967). Distribution of auxin in horizontal
woody stems in relation to gravimorphism. Nature 214: 1025–1027.
Lev-Yudan, S., and Aloni, R. (1995). Differentiation of the ray system
in woody plants. Bot. Rev. 61: 45–84.
Lewis, D.R., and Muday, G.K. (2009). Measurement of auxin trans-
port in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nat. Protoc. 4: 437–451.
Little, C.H.A., and Savidge, R.A. (1987). The role of plant growth regu-
lators in forest tree cambial growth. Plant Growth Regul. 6: 137–169.
Liu, L., Ramsay, T., Zinkgraf, M., Sundell, D., Street, N.R., Filkov, V., and
Groover, A. (2015). A resource for characterizing genome-wide binding
and putative target genes of transcription factors expressed during
secondary growth and wood formation in Populus. Plant J. 82: 887–898.
Liu, Y., You, S., Taylor-Teeples, M., Li, W.L., Schuetz, M., Brady, S.M.,
and Douglas, C.J. (2014). BEL1-LIKE HOMEODOMAIN6 and KNOTTED
ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA7 interact and regulate secondary cell wall
formation via repression of REVOLUTA. Plant Cell 26: 4843–4861.
Löfke, C., Zwiewka, M., Heilmann, I., Van Montagu, M.C.E., Teichmann,
T., and Friml, J. (2013). Asymmetric gibberellin signaling regulates vac-
uolar trafﬁcking of PIN auxin transporters during root gravitropism. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110: 3627–3632.
MacMillan, C.P., Mansﬁeld, S.D., Stachurski, Z.H., Evans, R., and
Southerton, S.G. (2010). Fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins:
specialization for stem biomechanics and cell wall architecture in
Arabidopsis and Eucalyptus. Plant J. 62: 689–703.
Mauriat, M., and Moritz, T. (2009). Analyses of GA20ox and GID1
over-expressing aspen suggest that gibberellins play two distinct
roles in wood formation. Plant J. 58: 989–1003.
Mele, G., Ori, N., Sato, Y., and Hake, S. (2003). The knotted1-like
homeobox gene BREVIPEDICELLUS regulates cell differentiation
by modulating metabolic pathways. Genes Dev. 17: 2088–2093.
Mellerowicz, E.J., and Gorshkova, T.A. (2012). Tensional stress genera-
tion in gelatinous ﬁbres: a review and possible mechanism based on
cell-wall structure and composition. J. Exp. Bot. 63: 551–565.
Mellerowicz, E.J., Immerzeel, P., and Hayashi, T. (2008). Xyloglu-
can: The molecular muscle of trees. Ann. Bot. (Lond.) 102: 659–665.
Nakamura, T., Saotome, M., Ishiguro, Y., Itoh, R., Higurashi, S.,
Hosono, M., and Ishii, Y. (1994). The effects of GA3 on weeping of
growing shoots of the Japanese cherry, Prunus spachiana. Plant
Cell Physiol. 35: 523–527.
Nishikubo, N., Awano, T., Banasiak, A., Bourquin, V., Ibatullin, F., Funada,
R., Brumer, H., Teeri, T.T., Hayashi, T., Sundberg, B., and Mellerowicz,
E.J. (2007). Xyloglucan endo-transglycosylase (XET) functions in gelatinous
layers of tension wood ﬁbers in poplar–a glimpse into the mechanism of the
balancing act of trees. Plant Cell Physiol. 48: 843–855.
Norberg, P.H., and Meier, H. (1996). Physical and chemical proper-
ties of gelatinous layer in tension wood ﬁbres of aspen (Populus
tremula L.). Holzforschung 20: 174–178.
Park, J.Y., Canam, T., Kang, K.Y., Ellis, D.D., and Mansﬁeld, S.D.
(2008). The effects of over-expression of an Arabidopsis sucrose
phosphate synthase (SPS) gene on plant growth and ﬁbre de-
velopment. Transgenic Res. 17: 181–192.
R Development Core Team (2014). R: A Language and Environment
for Statistical Computing. (Vienna, Austria Foundation for Statistical
Computing).
Ragni, L., Belles-Boix, E., Günl, M., and Pautot, V. (2008). In-
teraction of KNAT6 and KNAT2 with BREVIPEDICELLUS and
PENNYWISE in Arabidopsis Inﬂorescences. Plant Cell 20: 888–900.
Robinson, M., McCarthy, D.J., and Smyth, G. (2010). edgeR: a Bio-
conductor package for differential expression analysis of digital
gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26: 139–140.
Ruelle, J. (2014). Morphology, Anatomy and Ultrastructure of Re-
action Wood. (Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag).
Ruzin, S. (1999). Plant Microtechnique and Microscopy. (New York:
Oxford University Press).
Sakamoto, T., Kamiya, N., Ueguchi-Tanaka, M., Iwahori, S., and
Matsuoka, M. (2001). KNOX homeodomain protein directly sup-
presses the expression of a gibberellin biosynthetic gene in the
tobacco shoot apical meristem. Genes Dev. 15: 581–590.
Schrader, J., Baba, K., May, S.T., Palme, K., Bennett, M., Bhalerao,
R.P., and Sandberg, G. (2003). Polar auxin transport in the wood-
forming tissues of hybrid aspen is under simultaneous control of
developmental and environmental signals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 100: 10096–10101.
Sinnott, E.W. (1952). Reaction wood and the regulation of tree form.
Am. J. Bot. 39: 69–78.
Spicer,
R.,
Tisdale-Orr,
T.,
and
Talavera,
C.
(2013).
Auxin-
responsive DR5 promoter coupled with transport assays suggest
separate but linked routes of auxin transport during woody stem
development in Populus. PLoS One 8: e72499.
Taylor-Teeples, M., et al. (2015). An Arabidopsis gene regulatory
network for secondary cell wall synthesis. Nature 517: 571–575.
Timell, T.E. (1986). Compression Wood in Gymnosperms, Vol 2.
(Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag).
Trapnell, C., Pachter, L., and Salzberg, S.L. (2009). TopHat: discovering
splice junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics 25: 1105–1111.
Ukrainetz, N.K., Kang, K.-Y., Aitken, S.N., Stoehr, M., and Mansﬁeld,
S.D. (2008). Heritability and phenotypic and genetic correlations of
coastal Douglas ﬁr (Pseudotsuga menziesii) wood quality traits. Can. J.
For. Res. 38: 1536–1546.
Venglat, S.P., Dumonceaux, T., Rozwadowski, K., Parnell, L.,
Babic, V., Keller, W., Martienssen, R., Selvaraj, G., and Datla,
R. (2002). The homeobox gene BREVIPEDICELLUS is a key regu-
lator of inﬂorescence architecture in Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 99: 4730–4735.
Willige, B.C., Isono, E., Richter, R., Zourelidou, M., and Schwechheimer,
C. (2011). Gibberellin regulates PIN-FORMED abundance and is required
for auxin transport–dependent growth and development in Arabidopsis
thaliana. Plant Cell 23: 2184–2195.
Wilson, B.F., and Archer, R.R. (1977). Reaction wood: Induction and
mechanical action. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 28: 23–43.
Zhong, R., Lee, C., Zhou, J., McCarthy, R.L., and Ye, Z.-H. (2008). A
Battery of transcription factors involved in the regulation of secondary
cell wall biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 20: 2763–2782.
Zhong, R., and Ye, Z.-H. (2013). Transcriptional regulation of wood for-
mation in tree species. In Cellular Aspects of Wood Formation, Vol. 20,
J. Fromm, ed (Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Berlin), pp. 141–158.
Zhou, J., Lee, C., Zhong, R., and Ye, Z.-H. (2009). MYB58 and
MYB63 are transcriptional activators of the lignin biosynthetic
pathway during secondary cell wall formation in Arabidopsis. Plant
Cell 21: 248–266.
Gravitropism of Woody Stems
2813
