communications medicine
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Transcriptomics analysis reveals
molecular alterations underpinning
spaceﬂight dermatology
Check for updates
Henry Cope
1,25, Jonas Elsborg
2,3,25, Samuel Demharter
3, J. Tyson McDonald
4,
Chiara Wernecke
5,6, Hari Parthasarathy5,7, Hriday Unadkat5,8, Mira Chatrathi5,9, Jennifer Claudio5,10,
Sigrid Reinsch
5,11, Pinar Avci12, Sara R. Zwart
13, Scott M. Smith
14, Martina Heer15,
Masafumi Muratani
16,17, Cem Meydan
18, Eliah Overbey
18, Jangkeun Kim
18, Christopher R. Chin18,
Jiwoon Park
18,19, Jonathan C. Schisler
20, Christopher E. Mason
18,19, Nathaniel J. Szewczyk
1,21,
Craig R. G. Willis22, Amr Salam
23 & Afshin Beheshti
10,24
Abstract
Background Spaceﬂight poses a unique set of challenges to humans and the hostile
spaceﬂight environment can induce a wide range of increased health risks, including
dermatological issues. The biology driving the frequency of skin issues in astronauts is
currently not well understood.
Methods To address this issue, we used a systems biology approach utilizing NASA’s Open
Science Data Repository (OSDR) on space ﬂown murine transcriptomic datasets focused on
the skin, biochemical proﬁles of 50 NASA astronauts and human transcriptomic datasets
generated from blood and hair samples of JAXA astronauts, as well as blood samples
obtained from the NASA Twins Study, and skin and blood samples from the ﬁrst civilian
commercial mission, Inspiration4.
Results Key biological changes related to skin health, DNA damage & repair, and
mitochondrial dysregulation are identiﬁed as potential drivers for skin health risks during
spaceﬂight. Additionally, a machine learning model is utilized to determine gene pairings
associated with spaceﬂight response in the skin. While we identiﬁed spaceﬂight-induced
dysregulation, such as alterations in genes associated with skin barrier function and
collagen formation, our results also highlight the remarkable ability for organisms to re-adapt
back to Earth via post-ﬂight re-tuning of gene expression.
Conclusion Our ﬁndings can guide future research on developing countermeasures for
mitigating spaceﬂight-associated skin damage.
Throughout the course of a spaceﬂight mission, the astronaut exposome
includes altered gravity, elevatedradiation, and conﬁnement within a closed
environment with unique hygiene procedures, light cycles, and ventilation1.
These stressors perturb biological systems, inducing gene regulatory
changes, mitochondrial dysregulation, microbiome shifts, and DNA
damage1. Dermatological issues are not typically regarded as a key risk to
astronaut health and mission success, yet they are amongst the most
common in-ﬂight health issues reported by astronauts. During regular
International Space Station (ISS) missions averaging 6-months, skin rashes
have been identiﬁed as the most frequently reported in-ﬂight clinical
symptom, with 1.1 cases per ﬂight year, accounting for 40% of all notable
medicaleventsanda25-foldincreasecomparedtotheUnitedStates’general
population2. An additional 0.3 cases per ﬂight year include skin manifes-
tations accompanied by symptoms of infection; skin lesions associated with
viral reactivation were also reported and have been studied in-ﬂight2–4.
Notably, an in-ﬂight skin rash was reported to have occurred during a
6-month ISS mission, worsening immediately after extravehicular activity
(EVA)5, and a post-ﬂight skin rash was reported following the 1-year-long
A full list of afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.
e-mail: afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov
Plain language summary
Spaceﬂight is a hostile environment which
can lead to health problems in astronauts,
including in the skin. It is not currently well
understood why these skin problems occur.
Here, we analyzed data from theskin of space
ﬂown mice and astronauts to try and identify
possible explanations for these skin
problems. It appears that changes in the
activationofgenesrelatedtodamagetoDNA,
skin barrier health, and mitochondria (the
energy-producing parts of cells) may play a
role in these skin problems. Further research
will be needed to conﬁrm exactly how these
changes inﬂuence skin health, which could
lead tosolutionsfor preventing and managing
such issues in astronauts.
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

NASA Twins spaceﬂight study6. These events arouse particular concern for
future Moon and Mars missions, which will be longer, include high-levels of
EVA, and also include risk of exposure to irritant dust, reported previously
to induce skin issues in Apollo astronauts7. Elucidating the biological
response of skin in space could aid development of new countermeasures to
manage dermatological issues and optimize astronaut performance during
these future missions.
As the human body’s largest organ, the skin plays a crucial role in
numerous essential health functions. These include facilitating ﬂuid diffu-
sion, promoting wound healing, regulating body temperature, and enabling
tactile sensation. Skin is also the ﬁrst line of defense against chemicals,
allergens, infectious agents, and - importantly for spaceﬂight - radiation.
Studies of the astronaut skin microbiome have identiﬁed microbial inter-
change between the skin and the ISS interior8, and have also hypothesized
that abnormal proliferation of certain types of opportunistic microorgan-
isms on astronaut skin may stem from the unusual hygiene procedures on
the ISS, where wipes are used as opposed to showering9,10. While these
microbiome shifts and their associated health effects require further studies,
investigations into the molecular response of skin tissue in space are lacking.
In murine skin, the 13-day STS-135 study and the 91-day Mouse Drawer
System (MDS) study reported signiﬁcant spaceﬂight-induced modulation
of extracellular matrix (ECM) genes11,12; the set of genes did not overlap,
which could be due to signiﬁcant differences in study design (e.g. duration).
The MDS study also reported a 42% increase in synthesized procollagen
coupled with a 15% reduction in dermal thickness likely indicative of
increased collagen turnover, and an increase in hair follicles growing in the
anagen stage accompanied by dysregulation of hair follicle genes12. Corro-
borating gene regulatory changes associated with hair cycle were also
reported in an analysis of hair follicle samples from 10 astronauts in a Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) study13, yet reports of skin physio-
logical changes in astronauts, including dermal atrophy, have been
mixed14,15. In a recent analysis of astronaut skin punch biopsies taken before
and after the 3-day commercial Inspiration4 (i4) mission16, gene expression
changes within different layers of the skin were explored alongside micro-
biome changes, revealing signatures of increased inﬂammation and mito-
chondrial dysregulation across skin compartments, and gene regulatory
changes associated with activation of DNA damage response (DDR) pro-
cesses, T cell immunity, and increased barrier disruption in the outer epi-
dermal layer of the skin17.
In this study, we perform an analysis of ﬁve previously unreported
murine skin RNA-Seq datasets from the JAXA Mouse Habitat Unit 2
(MHU-2)18, NASA Rodent Research 5 (RR-5) and 7 (RR-7) experiments, to
identifyglobalgeneexpressionsignaturesinspaceﬂight-exposedskinand to
investigate the effect of study design on biological signatures relating to skin
health and common spaceﬂight themes including DNA damage and repair,
and mitochondrialdysregulation1.Inadditionto examining generegulatory
patterns, we use an explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) modeling
approach to construct interpretable machine learning models to identify
synergistic effects between pairs of genes, which we interpret as possible
biological interactions, that reveal putative disequilibria of dependent pro-
cesses. We then investigate gene regulatory changes observed in the rodent
skin data in astronaut data, including JAXA hair follicle data13, skin data
from the i4 mission, and blood gene expression data from the NASA
Twins19, JAXA Cell-Free Epigenome (CFE), and i4 studies. We conclude by
suggesting how these molecular signaturesmay eventually lead to follow-up
studies and pharmaceutical interventions.
Methods
Ethics and inclusion statement
This manuscript has included authors from all backgrounds from the sci-
entiﬁc international community and the results are held at the highest
ethical standards.
All human studies were done with ethical approvals with established
and approved IRBs and according to the criteria set by the Declaration of
Helsinki. The Inspiration4 (I4) mission was performed at Weill Cornell
Medicine. Blood samples were provided by SpaceX Inspiration4 crew
members after informed consent for research use. The procedure followed
guidelines set by Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) and operated under Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved
protocolsandinformedconsentwasobtained.Experimentswereconducted
in accordance with local regulations and with the approval of the IRB at the
Weill Cornell Medicine (IRB #21-05023569). All crewmembers consented
to data and sample sharing.
The NASA Twin Study subjects signed informed consent according to
the declaration of Helsinki and 14 CFR Part 1230 for collection and use of
sample materials and data in research protocols at NASA and the collabor-
ating institutions. Study protocols were approved by the NASA Flight
Institutional Review Board (protocol number Pro1245) and all participating
institutions. Also the data is hosted at the NASA Life Sciences Data Archive
(LSDA). Informed consent was provided by all participants in the NASA
Twin Study. The JAXA astronaut data was obtained from NASA’s GeneLab
Platformandthisstudyusedonlypublishedaggregatedquantiﬁcationvalues.
No ethical approval for this manuscript was required to use the JAXA
astronaut data since this was publicly available data on the GeneLab plat-
form. In addition the data made available on GeneLab was only provided as
anonymized aggregate data.
GeneLab spaceﬂight murine datasets
Five RNA-Seq datasets (OSD-238, OSD-239, OSD-240, OSD-241, OSD-
254) were downloaded from the NASA OSDR via the API, and full dataset
descriptions can be found on the dataset pages. These datasets are derived
from whole murine skin samples from the MHU-2, RR-5, and RR-7
spaceﬂight experiments. For MHU-2, singly-housed male C57BL/6J mice
were 9 weeks of age when ﬂown on the ISS for 30 days; they were euthanized
less than 1 day after return to Earth. Dorsal and femoral skin samples were
extracted from MHU-2 mice, and 6 replicates in spaceﬂight microgravity
and the matching 6 replicates in the 1G ground control were split into 2 sets
of 3, with half fed a JAXA chow diet and the other half fed JAXA chow with
supplemental FOS18. For RR-5, 30 week old BALB/c mice in shared housing
were ﬂownon theISSfor30 days;followingreturntoEarth,miceweregiven
30 days to recover before euthanasia and extraction of dorsal and femoral
skintissue.Finally,forRR-7,11weekoldC57BL/6JmiceandC3H/HeJmice
were ﬂown on the ISS for either 25 or 75 days before being euthanized
on-orbit.
RNA-Seq analysis of rodent datasets
Raw counts data, derived via a previously reported pipeline20, were down-
loaded from the NASA OSDR and loaded with tximport (v1.28.0). ERCC
genes were ﬁltered out, as were genes with zero counts in the minimum
number of samples corresponding to a single condition. Differential Gene
Expression (DGE) analysis using the Wald signiﬁcance test was performed
onspaceﬂightmicrogravityandgroundcontrolsamplesusingtheRpackage
DESeq221 (v1.40.2). For each data subset, microgravity spaceﬂight samples
were contrasted with ground control samples and cook’s cut off and inde-
pendent ﬁltering were not used. Mapping of mouse ENSEMBL gene IDs to
gene symbols and human orthologs was done using the R Package biomaRt
(v2.56.1) and ENSEMBL 105. For human orthologs, one-to-many mapping
was supported. All heatmaps were generated using the R package Com-
plexHeatmap (v2.16.0). All DGE statistics for the rodent data, including the
list of cross-mission genes, can be found in Supplementary Data 1.
Pathway analysis of rodent datasets
For Over Representation Analysis (ORA), the R package clusterProﬁler
(v4.8.3) was used on vectors of genes and bar plots were made via ggplot2
(v3.4.4). For Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), the R package FGSEA
(v1.26.0) was used. GSEA was performed on all DEGs for all data subsets,
with rank vectors consisting of HGNC symbols and corresponding sorted
t-scores in the data subset. MSigDB human collections H, C2, and C5 were
used(v7.4)andsetsizes>15werepermitted.Forthemitochondrialpathway
analysis, human pathways from MitoPathways (v3.0), with some additional
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
2

custom curated pathways (Supplementary Table 1), were used and set sizes
>1 were permitted. All heatmaps were generated using the R package
ComplexHeatmap (v2.16.0). All GSEA results, including mitochondrial
results, can be found in Supplementary Data 2.
RNA-Seq data analysis on Twin Study samples
Longitudinal samples were collected from a male astronaut aboard the ISS
andhisidenticaltwinonEarthduringa340daymissionincluding6months
preﬂight and 6 months postﬂight follow-up, for a total of 19 time points for
the ﬂight subject and 13 time points for the ground subject. Blood was
collected using CPT vacutainers (BD Biosciences Cat # 362760) per man-
ufacturer’s recommendations. For full details of sample separation and
processing see ref. 19. Brieﬂy, samples collected on ISS were either frozen in
−80 °C after separation of mononuclear cells by centrifugation (referred to
asCPT),orreturnedtoEarthin4 °CinaSoyuzcapsuleandsortedintoCD4,
CD8, CD19 populations and a lymphocyte depleted (LD) fraction. Samples
collected on Earth were either frozen for mononuclear cells or processed
when fresh for sorted cell populations. To correct for the effects of ambient
temperature exposure on RNA (approximately 36 h including landing and
repatriation) control samples were created by simulating similar conditions
to those that may occur during the ambient return and were compared to
fresh blood collections from the same individual. RNA extraction, library
prep and sequencing were completed per19 using both ribodepletion or
polyA selection kits.
As previously reported19, generated sequences were trimmed using
Trim Galore! (v0.4.1) and quantiﬁed to genes using kallisto22 on ENSEMBL
transcripts. Differentially expressed genes were called using DESeq221 on
each cell type separately by comparing preﬂight, inﬂight and postﬂight
groups, controlling for the normal biological variance within the 24 months
using the longitudinal data of the ground twin and using the simulated
ambient control samples as another covariate for sorted cells20,23. Reads were
mapped onto an updated reference genome (GRCh38)24.
JAXA Cell-Free Epigenome (CFE) Study RNA quantiﬁcation data
Aggregated RNA differential expression data and study protocols were
shared through the NASA OSDR with accession number: OSD-53025.
Plasma cell-free RNA samples for RNA-seq analysis were derived from
blood samples collected from 6 astronauts before, during, and after the
spaceﬂight on the ISS. Mean expression values were obtained from nor-
malized read counts of 6 astronauts for each time point. In total 2-3 pre-
ﬂight samples (L-168 ± 14 days, L-112 ± 14 days, L-56 ± 14 days), 4 in-ﬂight
samples (L + 5 ± 1 day, L + 30 ± 7 days, L + 60 ± 14 days, L + 120 ± 14dor
R-8 (−14d/+0d day)), and 3-4 post-ﬂight samples (R + 3 ± 1 day,
R + 30 ± 7 days, R + 60 ± 14 days, R + 120 ± 14 days) were collected per
astronaut. As provided by OSDR, data points for all subjects were pooled
into one group per mission phase.
JAXA astronaut hair follicle data
Gene expression data from 10 JAXA astronauts’ hair follicles13 was down-
loadedfromtheNASAOSDR(OSD-174).Rawdatafor60totalsampleswas
processed using LIMMA with R/bioconductor26. Brieﬂy, duplicate sample
single-color Agilent microarray data was background corrected, ﬁltered for
low expression probes, and quantile normalized. Differential gene expres-
sion was measured between pre-ﬂight, in-ﬂight, and post-ﬂight data points
using p-values adjusted for False Discovery Rates (FDR) with the
Benjamini–Hochberg method. As previously described13 hair follicle sam-
pleswerecollectedfromeachastronauton6-monthISSmissionsattwopre-
ﬂight time points (ﬁrstly between L-180 and L-90, and secondly between
L-60andL-14),twoin-ﬂighttimepoints(ﬁrstlybetweenL + 20andL + 37,
andsecondlybetween R-20 andR-7),andtwo post-ﬂight time points (ﬁrstly
between R + 2 and R + 7, and secondly between R + 30 and R + 90).
Inspiration4 (i4) astronaut sample collection
Four civilians, two males and two females, spent three days in Low-Earth
Orbit (LEO) at 585 km above Earth. The mission launched from NASA
Kennedy Space Center on September 15th, 2021 and splashed down in the
AtlanticOceannearCapeCanaveralonSeptember18th,2021.Allbiological
data derived from the Inspiration4 mission were collected pre- and post-
ﬂight, and will be accessible via the Space Omics and Medical Atlas
(SOMA)27. For this study, only data from blood samples and skin biopsies
were used. Pre-ﬂight samples were collected at L-92, L-44, and L-3 days
prior to launch to space. Upon return, post-ﬂight samples were collected at
R + 1, R + 45, and R + 82 days.
Blood samples were collected before (Pre-launch: L-92, L-44, and L-3)
and after (Return; R + 1, R + 45, and R + 82) the spaceﬂight. Chromium
Next GEM Single Cell 5′ v2, 10x Genomics was used to generate single cell
data from isolated PBMCs. Subpopulations were annotated based on Azi-
muth human PBMC reference28. Reads were mapped onto a recent refer-
ence genome (GRCh38)24. We followed the analysis pipeline as previously
reported [Ref. 29].
For skin spatial transcriptomics data, 4 mm diameter skin biopsies
were obtainedfromallInspiration4crew members,oncebefore ﬂight and as
soon as possible after return (L-44 and R + 1). As previously described in
detail17, these biopsies were ﬂash frozen and processed with the NanoString
GeoMx platform. Based on staining images using ﬂuorescent antibodies, a
total of 95 freeform regions of interest (ROIs) were proﬁled across outer
epidermal (OE), inner epidermal (IE), outer dermal (OD) and vascular
(VA) regions. The IE and OE regions represented stratum basale,
and stratum spinosum with stratum granulosum, respectively. GeoMx
WTAsequencingreadsfromNovaSeq6000werecompiledintoFASTQﬁles
corresponding to each ROI and converted to digital count conversion ﬁles
using the NanoString GeoMx NGS DnD Pipeline. From the Q3 normalized
count matrix that accounts for factors such as capture area, cellularity, and
read quality, the DESeq2 method was used to perform DGE analysis.
Records of vitamin D supplement consumption were not available for
the i4 crew.
All human studies were done with ethical approvals with established
andapprovedIRBsatWeillCornellMedicine.Bloodsampleswereprovided
by SpaceX Inspiration4 crew members after consent for research use. The
procedure followed guidelines set by Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) and operated under Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approved protocols and informed consent was obtained.
Experiments were conducted in accordance with local regulations and with
the approval of the IRB at the Weill Cornell Medicine (IRB #21-05023569).
Astronaut physiological data
Data are reported from three human subject experiments conducted on the
International Space Station: Nutritional Status Assessment (2006-2012),
Dietary Intake Can Predict and Protect Against Changes in Bone Meta-
bolism During Space Flight and Recovery (Pro K) (2010–2015), and Bio-
chemical Proﬁle (2013–2018). All protocols were reviewed and approvedby
the NASA Institutional Review Board and all subjects provided written
informed consent.
These missions were 4–6 months in length, and these studies included
blood and urine collections before, during, and after ﬂight, with analysis of
an array of nutritional and biochemical markers. Blood and urine samples
were collected 2 or 3 times before ﬂight: approximately Launch minus (L-)
180 days and L-45 days. In some cases, a third blood sample was collected
(typically along with the L-45 collection), and these tubes were centrifuged
and frozen for aliquoting after ﬂight batched with the samples collected
inﬂight. Blood samples were collected inﬂight, at approximately Flight Day
(FD) 15, 30, 60, 120, and 180. Postﬂight samples were collected in the ﬁrst
24-h after landing (designated return + 0, R + 0) and again 30-d later
(R + 30). The R + 0 samples were not necessarily fasting, given the time of
day and nature of return from ﬂight. Of the 59 crewmembers reported
herein: 8 returned on the Space Shuttle, with blood collection 2–4 h after
landing; 51 landed in Kazakhstan, with 7 of them returning to Star City,
Russia, with blood collection 8–10 h after landing; 44 were transported
directly back to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, with blood collection
approximately 24-h after landing. Pre- and postﬂight collections included
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
3

two 24-h urine collections, and inﬂight collections included one 24-h urine
collection. These collection techniques have been previously described30.
We report here vitamins and metabolites, oxidative stress and damage
markers,inﬂammatorymarkersandcytokines,liverenzymesandendocrine
indices. These were analyzed using standard techniques as previously
reported31.
As of this writing, data were available for 59 crewmembers (47 male,
12 female). Age at launch was 47.0 ± 5.6 y, body mass at launch
was 79.2 ± 11.8 kg (M: 83.3 ± 9.3; F: 63.0 ± 4.5). Body mass index was
25.5 ± 2.9 kg/m2 (M: 26.4 ± 2.6; F: 22.3 ± 1.5).
All available data are reported here, although the reported n for any
given test or session varies for a number of reasons, including: not all
experiments had all analytes included, mission length differences for some
crewmembers, schedule or other issues occasionally precluded sample
collection, and methods changes over time. Repeated measures analysis of
variance was conducted to test for differences during and after ﬂight com-
pared to preﬂight, and comparisons among time points were made using a
Bonferroni t-test. Multiple comparisons were accounted for, and only those
tests with p < 0.001 are reported. The data was plotted using R package
ggplot2 (v3.3.5).
QLattice symbolic regression modeling
We used symbolic regression (QLattice v3.0.132) to construct models
involving combinations of synergistic genes which map from the gene
expressions to spaceﬂight status. For these models, we only distinguish
between mice that went to space and mice that did not. Conventional
statistical methods typically allow for calculating the effect of a single gene at
a time through metrics such as p-values and false discovery rates. In con-
trast, symbolic regression models can reveal combinations of genes and
modules that best predict spaceﬂight status. These could be linear combi-
nationsinvolvingtwoormoregenesthathavepreviouslyalsobeenshownto
be statistically signiﬁcant, or it could be non-linear combinations that reveal
features that on their own were non-signiﬁcant but in synergy with a second
feature become highly predictive. In addition, known biological functions of
genes included in models, as well as the resultant mathematical relationship
between them, can potentially be interpreted to reveal regulations or
interactions that are affected by spaceﬂight.
In biological pathway analysis, it is well-known that up- or down-
regulation of one gene can have cascading effects, such that the function of
one gene becomes sensitive to that of another33. It has previously been
demonstrated that parsimonious machine learning models are able to
provide accurate outcome prediction in omics data, while preserving
interpretability34,35. The interpretability often results from the fact that
models might demonstrate otherwise opaque relations, which become clear
when combined effects are considered. An example could be an interaction
where the regulation of a single gene is itself unimportant for functional
changes, unless another gene is simultaneously regulated. This would
indicate a synergistic compound effect, which naturally can expand to a 3-,
4- or 5-gene synergy and beyond. The combined effect of two or more
individually insigniﬁcant gene expression levels may thus theoretically be
more powerful than the effect of a single gene with low p-value. Thus,
traditional statistical analysis masks sucheffects by the use of metricsrelated
to the individual gene.
UMAP dimensional reduction and gene clustering
For the clustering of genes shown in Fig. 1b, we performed a uniqueness
ﬁlteringbyﬁrstdroppingall geneswhere morethan aquarterofthesamples
had identical expression levels. Subsequently, we ﬁltered out all genes with a
varianceoflessthan1.7,resultingin2184 ﬁlteredgeneswithhighvariability.
A dimensional reduction was performed subsequent to ﬁltering by
uniformlydistributingtheﬁltereddataonaRiemannianmanifold,usingthe
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduc-
tion (UMAP). UMAP is a general purpose manifold learning and dimen-
sion reduction algorithm which is similar to t-SNE in that it predominantly
preserveslocalstructure.Yet,UMAPpreservesmoreglobalstructure,which
makes it a more suited algorithm when the objective of the dimensional
reduction is more than simple visualization (in this case the objective is
clustering).
Genes were then clustered using the Hierarchical Density-Based Spa-
tial Clustering of Applications with Noise (HDBSCAN)36. A primary
advantage of HDBSCAN is that it is always deterministic for the same
hyperparameters, and will thus always return the same clustering, all else
being equal. In addition, comparable clustering algorithms such as k-means
do not perform well unless clusters are of equal size and density with few
outliers. With biological data such as gene expressions, we expect large
variation in cluster size and density, making HDBSCAN the ideal choice.
Once geneswere clustered, the gene sets belonging to each cluster were
extracted and analyzed using three ontology databases in the Python
implementation, GSEAPY, of the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis37 tool
Enrichr38. We used the Elsevier Pathway Collection, the 2021 WikiPathway
Collection, and the 2021 MGI Mammalian Phenotype Level 4 Collection.
These enrichment analyses were used to provide context to each cluster by
appending an annotation if a notable amount of hits showed up for a
particular association.
Regulatory network analysis
We used the differential gene expression data from all cross-mission genes
across each comparison to perform an upstream regulator analysis using
QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (version 01-22-0139). We
identiﬁed the biological or chemical drugs in the QIAGEN IPA library of
regulators,deﬁnedashavinga Benjamini–Hochbergadjusted Pvalue < 0.05
and an absolute Z-score >1. Drugs from the dataset that met these criteria
and were associated with similar log2 fold-change patterns in the QIAGEN
Knowledge Base were visualized by hierarchical clustering of the unstan-
dardized Z-scores using Euclidean distance as the similarity metric, and
complete-linkagemethodforagglomeration.Statisticsonthefulllistofdrug
targets can be found in Supplementary Data 3.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Results
Spaceﬂight transcriptome global changes in rodent skin reﬂect
common biological hallmarks of spaceﬂight
To explore whether transcriptomic changes in the skin would occur during
spaceﬂight, we analyzed ﬁve RNA-Seq datasets from the NASA Open Sci-
ence Data Repository (OSDR)40, all representing skin tissue from space
ﬂown mice and matching ground control replicates. These datasets are
derivedfromthreedifferentspaceﬂightmissions(Fig.1a).Themostvariable
genesacross the datasetsclusterintofunctionalgroupsrelated to established
physiologicalrisksofspaceﬂight(Fig.1b).Forexample,spaceﬂightisknown
to induce immune dysfunction1 and Cluster 1 involves highly-correlated
genes associated with immune response, including genes linked to mod-
ulation of Immunoglobulin G (IgG) levels. Microgravity is also well estab-
lished to cause degradation of muscle1, and Cluster 9 contains a signiﬁcant
number of genes related to muscular morphology and muscle disorders.
Ionizing radiation is known to cause renal and pulmonary ﬁbrosis41,42 and
proﬁbrosis-like alterations were previously observed in lung tissue of mice
returned fromSpaceShuttleEndeavour(STS-118)43.Renalandlungﬁbrosis
associatedgenesfoundinCluster7,andgenesencodingproteinsinvolvedin
sclerotic diseases grouped in Cluster 8, further supports these reports.
Upon subsetting each dataset based on experimental groups (i.e. diet,
strain, skinsite) and performing differential gene expression (DGE) analysis
for spaceﬂight samples versus ground control samples, we end up with 10
data subsets (Fig. 2a). In total 476 unique differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) are signiﬁcant (False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤0.1)in at least 2 out of
the10datasubsets.OnesigniﬁcantDEGsharedacrossdatasubsetsfromthe
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
4

RR-7 study is GLYCAM1 which is shared between both data subsets for the
C57BL/6 J strain. GLYCAM1, a ligand for L-selectin that has been proposed
to modulate leukocyte transendothelial migration from blood44, is strongly
upregulated (Log2 Fold Change (LFC) ≈18.81, FDR < 10−6) at the 25 day
time point and strongly downregulated (LFC ≈−15.66, FDR < 0.002) at the
75 day time point, which could indicate a relationship between spaceﬂight
duration and immune alterations for the C57BL/6J mice. Over repre-
sentation analysis (ORA) reveals that a large proportion of the 244 sig-
niﬁcant DEGs shared between MHU-2 data subsets are associated with the
organization of collagen and the ECM (Fig. 2b). Signiﬁcant modulation of
genes associated with ECM homeostasiswas previouslyreported in analyses
of the skin of space ﬂown mice11,12. The MHU-2 subset from the dorsal skin
of mice fed a standard JAXA chow diet with supplemental prebiotic fruc-
tooligosaccharides (FOS) contains the highest quantity of signiﬁcant
(FDR ≤0.1)DEGsbyasubstantialmargin(Fig.2a).Inground-basedrodent
studies, FOS has been shown to improve gut microbiome balance, increase
bone density, and affect the immune system through increased short chain
fatty acid (SCFA) production (modifying interleukin production and nat-
ural killer cell activity), and modiﬁcation of the immune system via gut-
associated lymphoid tissue18,45. Due to the disparity between the number of
signiﬁcant DEGs in the data subsets, and the variety of conditions between
data subsets, care must be taken when combining these data subsets to infer
shared responses of rodent skin to spaceﬂight.
Genes signiﬁcantly altered in rodent skin spaceﬂight response
across multiple missions are associated with cell cycle
processes
To address the previously mentioned bias in the MHU-2 dorsal skin data
subset with a FOS-supplemented diet, and to delineate the common
response of murine skin to spaceﬂight across multiple datasets, a list of 189
Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) is generated exhibiting signiﬁcance
(False Discovery Rate ≤0.1) in data subsets from at least two distinct mis-
sions. For the majority of the signiﬁcant DEGs, there is a trend of down-
regulation in the MHU-2 dorsal skin dataset with the FOS-supplemented
diet, and in the RR-7 mission C57BL/6J mice after 75 days of ﬂight (Sup-
plementary Fig. 1). A smaller cluster of genes (e.g., LAMA1, S1PR1,
HMGCS2, TXNIP, IGFBP3, ADGRF5, CAR4, HSD17B11, C1QTNF9,
KLF11) are also signiﬁcant in those same data subsets, but are signiﬁcantly
upregulated (Fig. 3a).
To go beyond single-gene signiﬁcance, we use QLattice modeling32 to
construct models that predict the spaceﬂight status of all samples in the data
(i.e. from all data subsets). These models use the expression of two genes at
most to arrive at maximally relevant and minimally redundant models. In
Fig. 3c, d, we show the decision boundaries of the two strongest models
found, with Area Under Curve (AUC) scores of 0.86 and 0.85, respectively.
Both models show that the spaceﬂight status is well separated using only the
expression of two genes as input, while also having plausible biological
interpretations, which we discuss in the following sections.
The 189 cross-mission DEGs are primarily involved in cell-cycle
pathways (Fig. 3b), with several of the genes (e.g. LAMA1, C1QTNF9,
HMGCS2, TXNIP, KLF11) clustering with average trends of upregulation
across the datasets (Fig. 3a). Spaceﬂight is well-documented to perturb the
cell-cycle1. These genes tend also to be involved in metabolic pathways,
particularly those associated with diabetes; HMGCS2 has been shown to
regulate mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation46, while LAMA1 and KLF11
variations have been shown to be risk factors in type 2 diabetes47,48. Aside
from being a protector against oxidative stress, TXNIP is similarly impli-
cated in metabolic diseases, and is typically upregulated in diabetic and
prediabetic muscle tissue49. C1QTNF9 (also known as CTRP9) has also
emerged as a potentially important component of pathways involving lipid
metabolism and adipose tissue, exempliﬁed by the fact that C1QTNF9
transgenic mice have been shown to resist weight gain and metabolic
dysfunction50. It is interesting to note that upregulation of these metabolic
pathway genes appears generally weaker for female mice. This might be
linked to the same mechanisms offering higher protection for females
against diet-induced obesity compared to male mice, as has been noted in
other studies51.
Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P)-Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor
(S1PR) axis have been implicated in pathogenesis of both inﬂammatory and
autoimmuneskindiseasesandalsoplaysaroleinskin’simmuneresponseto
viral infection52. In both MHU-2 and RR-7 missions S1PR1 is enriched,
while this effect is reversed in RR-5 after 30-day recovery (Fig. 3a). On the
contrary FLG (Filaggrin), CASP14, KRT2, genes involved in corniﬁed
envelope and skin barrier formation36–38,53–55, generally showed an opposite
trend ingeneexpressionpatterns(Fig.3a).CASP14isalsothemaindriverof
the second-most predictive 2-gene QLattice modelobtained from the cross-
mission key gene list, which involved a combined model of CASP14 and
S1PR1 (Fig. 3d).
OXTR, identiﬁed as a key driverin the most predictive 2-gene QLattice
model derived from the cross-mission key gene list, along with SLC6A18
(Fig. 3c), is predominantly localized in the basal layer of the epidermis. Its
primary expression is attributed to keratinocytes and dermal ﬁbroblasts56.
OXTR together with oxytocin has been shown to mediate oxidative stress
response in the skin56. Our analysis revealed an increase in gene expression
of OXTR across all missions and experimental conditions except for C3H/
Hej mice in the RR-7 mission at the 25-day time point (Fig. 3a). Both
Fig. 1 | Global data overview. a Breakdown of the rodent datasets used in this study. b Clustering of the most variable genes within the rodent datasets with functional
annotation.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
5

estrogens and androgensplay an important role in skin and hair physiology.
HSD17B11, which has a stronger expression in steroidogenic cells such as
sebaceousglands,hasbeenpredicted tobeinvolved inandrogenmetabolism
during steroidogenesis, and conversion 5α-androstane-3α, 17β-diol to
androsterone57. Similar to the pattern observed in OXTR, HSD17B11
expression was increased in all murine datasets except for RR-5 dorsal skin
group (Fig. 3a).
Astronaut data correlates with select gene expression changes
occurring across missions in the murine skin models
Having investigated a set of cross-mission genes regulated by spaceﬂight in
rodent skin, we then decided to investigate the expression of human
orthologs of these genes in astronaut studies. Firstly, we use post-ﬂight vs
pre-ﬂight gene expression data from skin samples collected during the i4
mission. Similar to the patterns observed in murine models (Fig. 3a), FLG
and CASP14, which play signiﬁcant roles in skin barrier formation, are also
downregulated in the epidermis of i4 astronauts (Fig. 4a), where they are
primarilyexpressed.Intheliterature,FLGisreportedtomainlybeexpressed
in stratum granulosum58, with mutations associated with dry skin, atopic
dermatitis, contactdermatitis as well as ichthyosis vulgaris54,59,60. CASP14 on
the other hand is known to be primarily expressed in differentiating and
cornifying layers44 and decreased levels were detected in lesional skin
biopsies of patients with atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis61,62.
Likewise, KRT2 which was downregulated across all subgroups in the
MHU-2 and RR-7 missions (Fig. 3a), was also downregulated in the skin of
i4 astronauts, with strongest downregulation in outer epidermis where it is
primarily expressed but also in inner epidermis and outer dermis (Fig. 4a).
Additionally, similarly to the trend of upregulation in the rodent data
(Fig.3a),OXTRisupregulatedacrossallcompartmentsstudiedinthei4skin
(Fig. 4a) and HSD17B11 is upregulated in both compartments of the epi-
dermis and in the outer dermis (Fig. 4a).
In some astronauts returning from long-term spaceﬂight, decrease in
melanin content has been previously reported63. In the inner epidermis of
the i4 skin data, where melanin synthesis takes place, we found down-
regulation of two genes associated with melanin biosynthesis, TYRP1 and
DCT64 (Fig. 4a). However, TYR which synthesizes tyrosinase, the rate lim-
iting enzyme of melanin synthesis was upregulated in the same
compartment65 (Fig. 4a). TYR, DCT, and TYRP1 clustered in the rodent
data, with an average trend of downregulation, particularly in the MHU-2
dorsal skin dataset with the FOS-supplemented diet, and in the RR-7 mis-
sion C57BL/6J mice after 75 days of ﬂight (Fig. 3a).
We also analyze gene expression data from the blood of astronauts
from the NASA Twins, JAXA CFE studies, and i4 studies (Supplementary
Fig. S2). In the NASA Twins Study, the most noteworthy results are in
CD4 cell type in-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight samples with signiﬁcant down-
regulation in a group of genes (e.g. DSC2, TMEM252, CEBPD, CA4, and
PTGS2, and OTX1) persisting post-ﬂight (Supplementary Fig. 2a). These
genes display no signiﬁcant changes in CD8 cells, which may indicate that
Fig. 2 | Differentially expressed genes shared between datasets. a An upset plot
showing the number of signiﬁcant (FDR ≤0.1) differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) in spaceﬂight versus ground data subsets and the number of overlapping
signiﬁcant DEGs between these data subsets. The colored annotation bar on the left
of the plot shows how the original datasets divide into 10 data subsets based on all
unique conditions including diet, biological sex and strain. The bar plot on the right
of the upset plot shows the number of signiﬁcant DEGs in each of the 10 data subsets.
The bar plot on the top shows the number of intersecting DEGs between combi-
nations of the data subsets, as indicated by the connected dots within the body of the
upset plot. Black connecting lines indicate combinations spanning across multiple
missions, and other connecting lines are colored according to the annotation bar,
based on their shared mission. b A bar plot of signiﬁcant Gene Ontology Biological
Process (GOBP) pathways from signiﬁcant DEGs shared by any subsets within the
MHU-2 mission (i.e., DEGs from the blue bars in panel a).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
6

their downregulation is a response to immune system stressors affecting
the helper function and signaling of CD4 cells. DDIT4 (DNA-damage-
inducible transcript 4), STIL and TOP2A cell-cycle associated genes are
amongst the most strongly upregulated genes in-ﬂight compared to pre-
ﬂight in the CD8 cells, and exhibit downregulation post-ﬂight to trend
towards pre-ﬂight levels (Supplementary Fig. 2a). In the CFE study, sev-
eral genes were strongly upregulated in-ﬂight and then downregulated
post-ﬂight (e.g., OXTR, PRR9, ERCC6L) in the blood samples from JAXA
astronauts (Supplementary Fig. 2b). In the i4 mission blood samples the
majority of genes show a pronounced suppression in the time point
immediately before ﬂight, which could be indicative of increased stress
prior to launch. Several genes then show strong upregulation at the ﬁrst
post-ﬂight time point (e.g., BARD1, BRCA1, RAD54B, EXO1, OXTR, and
HSD17B11) (Supplementary Fig. 2c), suggesting upregulation due to
spaceﬂight or landing stressors, followed by post-ﬂight recovery towards
baseline expression levels from second post-ﬂight time point and beyond.
However, some other genes appear to show a delayed upregulation fol-
lowing spaceﬂight, as they are upregulated in the second post-ﬂight time
Fig. 3 | Cross-mission genes involved in rodent skin spaceﬂight response. a A
heatmap showing regulatory changes of select cross-mission genes (genes that are
signiﬁcantly (FDR ≤0.1) differentially expressed between ﬂight and ground control
across multiple missions) within each rodent data subset. b A bar plot showing the
GOBP pathways that the full list of cross-mission genes are involved in. c A decision
boundary plot of the strongest cross-mission QLattice model using only the
expression of two genes as input features to predict the spaceﬂight status of the all
mice in the data. d A decision boundary plot of the second-strongest model across all
missions.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
7

point, two months after ﬂight (e.g. KLF11, CA4, OXT1, TM4SF4) and
return towards baseline at the third post-ﬂighttime point (Supplementary
Fig. 2c). The gene expression alterations in these sets of genes are
potentially due to a re-adaptation response.
Speciﬁc pathways and genes related to skin health are altered in
spaceﬂight
To determine direct relevance of spaceﬂight to skin health, we conduct
targeted analysis with a curated list of key pathways involved in skin health
from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) and identify which of
these pathways and associated genes are signiﬁcantly modulated in the
murine skin datasets. A collagen biosynthesis pathway and a set of collagen
genes (e.g., COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, and COL5A1) were signiﬁcantly
(FDR ≤0.1) suppressed/downregulated across all dataset subsets for the
MHU-2 mission, while showing a trend of weak enrichment/upregulation
acrossthe two other missions(Fig. 5a). Additionally,severalcollagenand/or
ECM related genes (e.g., MMP3, COL5A2, COL6A1, COL6A2, COL15A1,
COL6A3, SPARC, PCOLCE, and PYCR1) were signiﬁcantly (FDR ≤0.1)
downregulated in all of the MHU-2 data subsets except femoral skin with
the standard diet, and a few collagen related genes were signiﬁcantly
downregulated only in the dorsal subsets from the MHU-2 mission (e.g.,
P3H1, CRTAP, COL14A1, and FKBP14) (Fig. 5a). Overall, the distinct
collagen/ECM downregulation signature (Fig. 5a) suggests that a study
design difference in the MHU-2 mission (compared to the RR-5 and RR-7
missions), where the use of young single-housed male mice or dissection
shortly after the hypergravity event of Live Animal Return (LAR) may have
suppressed collagen biosynthesis. Similarly, we ﬁnd an overall trend of
enrichment of pathways relating to thin skin and dermal atrophy in the RR-
5 and RR-7 mice, with suppression occurring in the MHU-2 mice (Fig. 5a),
likely driven by regulatory patterns in the collagen-associated genes. While
thereisageneraltrendofupregulation,theRR-5missiongenerallylacksany
signiﬁcant results for genesrelating to skin health, which could be due tothe
30 days of recovery post-ﬂight. In addition to being reported as cross-
mission genes in the previous section, CASP14, FLG and KRT2 were also
identiﬁed as key skin health genes (Fig. 5).
In post-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight skin samples from the i4 mission, several
collagen/ECM genes (e.g., SPARC, COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL6A1,
COL6A2, and COL6A3) were downregulated across the whole dermis,
whereas COL5A1 was only downregulated in the vascular compartment of
the dermis (Fig. 5b). MMP3, which induces accelerated loss of skin collagen
when there is inﬂammation, was upregulated across the whole dermal
layer65 (Fig. 5b). Likewise, several genes (e.g., P3H1, COL14A1, COL15A1,
and COLA12A1) were upregulated in both compartments of the der-
mis (Fig. 5b).
KRT24, involved in terminal differentiation of keratinocytes, is
reported to be mainly conﬁned to stratum spinosum with slight over-
expression in senescent keratinocytes49 and has been shown to induce
apoptosis of keratinocytes66. In the post-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight i4 skin data
KRT24 is upregulated in all compartments of the skin with a more pro-
minent increase in outer epidermis and vascular layers66 (Fig. 5b). Late
corniﬁed envelope genes (LCE) are located in the epidermal differentiation
complex on chromosome 1 and in the skin their expression is known to be
mainly conﬁned to the epidermis, speciﬁcally to upper stratum granulosum
and premature corniﬁed envelopes67,68. In both the inner epidermis and
outer dermis of the i4 skin data, LCE2A, LCE2B, LCE2C, LCE2D, genes that
respond to UV and calcium67 and LCE5A were upregulated post-ﬂight vs
pre-ﬂight (Fig. 5b).
Inthe NASA Twins studyblood samples, COL6A2 was upregulated in-
ﬂight and then downregulated post-ﬂight in CD8 cells, with PYCR1 fol-
lowing the same pattern in CD4 cells (Supplementary Fig. 3a). In the CFE
study, blood samples from JAXA astronauts had strong in-ﬂight upregu-
lation of RPTN and COL3A1, and in particular LCE2B, where upregulation
increased further post-ﬂight (Supplementary Fig. 3b). On the other hand,
PYCR1 and GJB6 showed the opposite trend in gene expression, with strong
downregulation in-ﬂight and almost complete reversal upon return (Sup-
plementary Fig. 3b). PYCR1, which was upregulated post-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight
in all skin layers of i4 astronauts (Fig. 5b) encodes pyrroline-5-carboxylate
reductase 1, an enzyme that catalyzes the last step in proline synthesis via
utilization of NADH or NADPH. Proline plays an important role in collagen
synthesis
and
PYCR1
deﬁciency
results
in
collagen
and
elastin
abnormalities69. Conversely, COL3A1 encodes alpha 1 chain of type III
collagen, which is an EMP synthesized in cells as pre-collagen and its
accumulation was shown to cause ﬁbrosis in various organs70,71. In case of
LCE2C and KRT33A, weak in-ﬂight downregulation was followedby strong
post-ﬂight upregulation (Supplementary Fig. 3b). Although less apparent,
this trend for KRT33A was also observed in the JAXA HAIR data (Fig. 5c).
KRT33A, one of the type 1 hair keratin genes, is known to be highly
expressed in the cortex of hair follicles, and its expression is reported to
decrease with age72. Lastly, genes such as COL6A2 and FKBP14, a collagen/
ECM related gene associated with diseases such as kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome that is characterized by joint hypermobility, hyperelastic
skin, hearing impairment, muscle hypotonia and occasional vascular fra-
gility like aortic rupture73, were downregulated in-ﬂight and their average
expression persisted post-ﬂight (Supplementary Fig. 3b).
Fig. 4 | The proﬁle of the cross-mission genes in astronauts. a Heatmap showing
log2 fold-change in orthologs of the rodent skin cross-mission genes in astronaut
skin data from the Inspiration4 mission, for different skin layers. b Heatmap
showing t-score in orthologs of the rodent skin cross-mission genes in hair follicle
samples at different time points from the JAXA HAIR astronaut study.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
8

Radiosensitivity of mouse strains impacts DNA damage
response in the skin following spaceﬂight
As part of our targeted analysis, we also opted to investigate the mod-
ulation of DNA damage and repair pathways in rodent skin. DNA
damage and repair is a well-established response to space radiation19,74
and little research is reported on the consequences this will have on the
skin during spaceﬂight. When ionizing radiation hits DNA molecules,
single-strand breaks (SSBs) and double-strand breaks (DSBs) occur,
with DDR mechanisms activated to repair these breaks74. For the
majority of DNA damage and repair pathways, both the dorsal and
femoral skin RR-5 mission data subsets and the 25-day time point from
the C3H/HeJ mice in the RR-7 mission show an opposing pattern
compared to the other data subsets (Fig. 6). In these three data subsets,
pathways relating to DNA damage and repair are generally enriched,
while being suppressed in other data subsets. BALB/c and C3H/HeJ
mice, as used in these data subsets, have been shown to be more radio-
sensitive compared to C57BL/6J mice75–77, so repair mechanisms may be
activated to mitigate increased radiation-induced DNA damage. In the
C3H/HeJ mice there is a trend of decreasing activity for the DDR
pathways from the 25-day to 75-day time points which could indicate
either adaptation of the DNA repair pathways over time in space or
dysregulation following extended-duration spaceﬂight (Fig. 6). The
enrichment of DDR pathways in RR-5 also follows 30-days of spaceﬂight
and a post-ﬂight recovery period of 30-days (Fig. 6). However, DNA
repair genes were reported to still be enriched compared to pre-ﬂight
levels when evaluated at 6-months post-ﬂight during the NASA Twins
study19, so persistent DDR activation during post-ﬂight recovery in the
mice could be indicative of a similar mechanism.
Mitochondrial dysregulation increased in the skin during
spaceﬂight
Mitochondrial stress has been identiﬁed as a key hub for spaceﬂight
response in multi-tissue analysis, yet skin was not included78. Skin is a tissue
with high turnover and energy requirements79, so we decided to investigate
spaceﬂight changes relating to mitochondrial stress in murine skin. We ﬁnd
that spaceﬂight alters mitochondrial pathways in the skin (Fig. 7a), as
previously observed in other tissues and across species78. Enrichment of an
integrated stress response (ISR) pathway in all but two of the dataset subsets
(Fig. 7a) is consistent with a previous report of potentially activated ISR due
to mitochondrial dysfunction in space ﬂown mice78. Interestingly, the two
data subsets where ISR appeared to instead be suppressed were the 25 day
time points for both strains from the RR-7 mission (Fig. 7a), implicating
spaceﬂight duration as an important factor for modulating ISR. Addition-
ally, we ran the QLattice machine learning model on the full gene set to
obtain a set of models that were unbiased by feature selection due to e.g.
variance ﬁltering and the selection of cross-mission genes. One of the
10 strongest 2-feature models involved the expression of the genes
D2HGDH(D-2-hydroxyglutaratedehydrogenase)80andRPLP0-PS1(agene
coding for the ribosomal protein RPLP0). The model’s decision boundary
(Fig.7b)demonstrateshowthesimultaneousupregulationofD2HGDHand
downregulation of RPLP0-PS1 characterizes the space-ﬂown mice, with a
resulting AUC score of 0.8280. The upregulation of D2HGDH generally
indicates an increased ability to break down the toxic D-2-hydroxyglutarate
(D2H) compound in the mitochondria. In our case, this could be a com-
pensatory mechanism due to larger build-up of the compound, and the
model suggests that this is further dependent on the abundance of the
RPLP0 protein.
Fig. 5| Behavior of the speciﬁc genes associated with skin health in astronauts and
rodents. a The orange (suppressed) and green (enriched) heatmap shows the nor-
malized enrichment score (NES) of curated skin health pathways (full list Supple-
mentary Table 1) that are signiﬁcant (FDR ≤0.05) in at least one rodent subset. The
red (upregulated) and blue (downregulated) heatmap shows the t-score for leading
edge genes from the signiﬁcant pathways that are signiﬁcant (FDR ≤0.1) in at least
two data subsets. b Heatmap showing log2 fold-change in orthologs of the genes
from Panel a in astronaut skin data from the Inspiration4 mission, for different skin
layers. c Heatmap showing t-score in orthologs of the genes from Panel a in hair
follicle samples at different time points from the JAXA HAIR astronaut study.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
9

Circulating physiological markers from astronauts indicate that
exercise countermeasures may have improved skin health
We investigate standard physiological biomarkers collected from astronaut
urine and blood81,82 to see whether average trends in these biomarkers
connect tospaceﬂight gene regulatory changes occurring in the skin (Fig. 8).
In-ﬂight increases in IGF-1, leptin and white blood cell levels may indicate
altered stress response due to spaceﬂight. Following a hypothesis that
improved countermeasures may improve skin physiological parameters in
astronauts on the ISS14,15,we split thedata into astronautsthat usedthe older
Interim Resistive Exercise Device (iRED), and astronauts that used the
newer Advanced Resistive Exercise Device (ARED). Notably, overlapping
data to that shown in Fig. 8 have been used as evidence of improvements in
parameters relating to bone mineral density81. Indeed, while vitamin D
decreased in-ﬂight and normalized upon return to Earth for both exercise
devices, ARED appeared to reduce this drop. Vitamin D is well-established
to be an important mediator of skin health83. Notably, this decrease in
vitamin D is observed despite consistent programmatic vitamin D supple-
mentation since the collection of blood samples81.
Spaceﬂight-induced gene regulatory changes in the skin corre-
late with relevant drug responses
Having established a list of genes that changed in the rodent skin across
multiple missions, we then investigate potential drug targets and mechan-
isms for these genes via Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Fig. 9). As with
the DDR pathways (Fig. 6), both the dorsal and femoral skin RR-5 mission
data subsets and the 25-day time point from the C3H/HeJ mice in the RR-7
mission show an opposing pattern compared to the other data subsets for
the predicted upstream regulators (Fig. 9).
Several drugs were predicted to exhibit signiﬁcant positive correlation
with gene expression changes seen in the space ﬂown mice, with the
exception of dorsal skin tissues obtained from C3H/HeJ mice that spent 25
days in ﬂight for the RR-7 mission, and dorsal and femoral skin from the
Fig. 6 | DNA damage and repair pathways being regulated in rodents ﬂown to space. Heatmap of pathways relating to DNA damage response and repair mechanisms (full
list Supplementary Table 1), signiﬁcant (FDR ≤0.05) in at least one data subset.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
10

RR-5 mice (30-day recovery) (Fig. 9). For example, calcitriol is the active
form of Vitamin D, and has been observed to affect skin barrier formation
and epidermal differentiation84 it is used clinically to treat plaque psoriasis85.
Calcitriol is also associated with immune system alterations in the skin, and
topicalapplicationinmicehasbeenshownto exacerbateatopic dermatitis86.
On the other hand, in a murine model, epidermal permeability and anti-
microbial skin barrier impaired by corticosteroid, was shown to be reduced
via calcitriol87. Alteration of gene regulatory patterns associated with calci-
triol, in the mouse data subsets (Fig. 9) could indicate activation of com-
pensatory mechanisms for spaceﬂight-induced skin barrier dysfunction,
epidermal differentiation, and immune system alterations. L-asparaginase
showed the strongest correlation with gene regulatory changes in these
spaceﬂight-exposed mice (Fig. 9). L-asparaginase is used in treatment of
acute lymphoblastic leukemia and lymphoblastic lymphoma and exerts its
action by depriving leukemic cells of circulating asparagine, resulting in
DNA breaks, cell cycle arrest and cell death87,88. It is also an immunogenic
protein and leads to skin rash, dry skin, and hypersensitivity reactions89.
Similarly, there was strong positive correlation between gene regulatory
changes in these spaceﬂight-exposed mice associated with use of the Vita-
min A derivative tretinoin (all-trans retinoic acid)90, and two selective
estrogen receptor modulators, tamoxifen and 4-hydroxytamoxifen91–94.
On the contrary, estrogen and diethylstilbestrol, a synthetic form of
estrogen, showed a reversed pattern compared to the aforementioned drug
targets(Fig. 9). These drugs showed positive correlation with the expression
changes in the RR-5 datasets, and the RR-7 25-day C3H/Hej data subset,
and negative correlation in the other data subsets (Fig. 9).
Discussion
Skin is well-established as an essential organ for health on Earth, yet despite
the frequency of dermatological issues in astronauts2, the molecular
response of skin to spaceﬂight is understudied. Here, we have performed a
comprehensive study on the molecular impact of spaceﬂight on skin, with
the aim of addressing gaps in the understanding of spaceﬂight associated
skin health risks. Our analysis indicated intriguing gene regulatory changes
occurring in the skin of spaceﬂight vs ground control mice during the
MHU-2, RR-5, and RR-7 spaceﬂight experiments, that also show some
overlaps with molecular alterations observed in astronauts.
The genes exhibiting the highest variability across the datasets formed
clusters associated with well-established physiological risks of spaceﬂight,
notably immune dysfunction and muscle degradation (Fig. 1b). Further-
more, the majority of genes showing signiﬁcant differential expression across
multiple missions in murine data were linked to cell cycle processes, parti-
cularly chromosome segregation (Fig. 3a, b). This suggests that skin mirrors
common spaceﬂight signatures observed in other tissues, including dysre-
gulation of cell cycle processes1,19. Further to that point, we see an enrichment
of DDR pathways in some data subsets from radiosensitive BALB/c and
C3H/HeJ strains75–77 (Fig. 6), which is also a well-established spaceﬂight
response19,74. These repair mechanisms may be activated to mitigate
radiation-induced DNA damage and appear to remain active during the
post-ﬂight recovery process, as seen in the RR-5 mission where samples were
collected 30 days after ﬂight. This ﬁnding is consistent with reports of
sustained post-ﬂight DDR activation from the NASA Twins study19. Nota-
bly, DNA damage in the skin has important implications for skin cancers
including melanoma, of which astronauts carry a higher risk, although the
direct correlation between spaceﬂight and melanoma is still under
investigation95,96. Similarly, mitochondrial dysregulation is established as a
key molecular signature of spaceﬂight78, and we see enrichment of an ISR
pathway in all but two of the murine skin data subsets (Fig. 7a), which may
be driven by increased oxidative stress or DNA damage. ISR activation
appears to be impacted by spaceﬂight duration, as the 25 day time points for
RR-7 show a suppression of the ISR pathway1,78. Using an explainable
machine learning approach32, we also observed the counteractive mechanism
Fig. 7 | Mitochondrial speciﬁc analysis on rodent spaceﬂight skin tissue.
a Heatmap of pathways relating to the mitochondria, signiﬁcant (FDR ≤0.05) in at
least 1 data subset. b Decision boundary for the 2-gene model related to mito-
chondrial changes. The model indicates an increased removal of the toxic D2H
compound in mitochondria through upregulation of D2HGDH, which is less pro-
nounced when PPP1R3B expression is suppressed.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
11

played by D2HGDH, which was generally upregulated in space ﬂown mice
(Fig. 7b) indicating an increased need for breakdown of toxic D-2-
hydroxyglutarate (D2H) molecules in mitochondria. In this model, the
partner gene RPLP0-PS1 codes for the ribosomal protein RPLP0 and is
down-regulated in space ﬂown mice. RPLP0 has previously been implicated
in the top signiﬁcant network for the mitochondria-mediated cycle of Alz-
heimer’s disease97. Low or absent levels of RPLP0 seem to limit the com-
pensatory mechanism in the model (Fig. 7b). If this occurs, build-up of D2H
and suppression of certain enzyme functions can result, causing DNA and
histones to enter hypermethylated states and activate oncogenes and inhibit
tumor suppressors98. Build-up of D2H in the mitochondria may thus be
related to cell changes induced by DNA damage from space radiation.
Notably, gene regulatory changes associated with mitochondrial dysregula-
tion and DDR were also reported in the skin data from the i4 mission17,
corroborating these changes as key molecular hallmarks of spaceﬂight in
the skin.
The downregulation of collagen/ECM genes and the suppression of
collagen/ECM-related pathways in the MHU-2 mouse mission, where
spaceﬂight samples were collected shortly after landing (Figs. 2b and 5a),
mirror ﬁndings from previous studies where a reduction in collagen
synthesis occurred under hypergravity conditions in cultured human
ﬁbroblasts99. In contrast, RR-7 mice (frozen in space) generally exhibited an
upregulation of the same collagen/ECM genes (Fig. 5a), consistent with
results from the aforementioned human ﬁbroblast study, which reported a
143% increase in collagen synthesis during microgravity99. Similar to RR-7,
RR-5 also showed a trend of upregulation in collagen/ECM genes (Fig. 5a).
The opposing patterns between the MHU-2 mission and RR-5/RR-7 may
arisefromdiversefactorsowingtoexperimentaldesigndifferences.Notably,
the timing of sample collection introduces a critical variable, as seen in the
MHU-2 mission where samples were collected less than one day post-ﬂight,
in contrast to RR-5, where collection occurred after a 30-day post-ﬂight
recovery, and RR-7, where samples were obtained directly in space. This
temporal distinction implies that collagen suppression observed in MHU-2
micemaybeinﬂuenced,atleastinpart,bytheacutehypergravityresponse,a
known factor in decreasing collagen synthesis99, and the stress-induced
release of glucocorticoids100–102, rather than being solely attributed to the
spaceﬂight environment. Moreover, differences in sex and housing
arrangements further complicate the comparison; MHU-2 mice are singly-
Fig. 8 | Astronaut physiological markers compiled from up to 50 astronauts.
a Speciﬁc blood markers which contain data points for pre-launch (L−), ﬂight (FD),
and return to Earth (R+). The numbers on the x-axis indicate the number of days for
each group. Interim Resistive Exercise Device (iRED) is shown in blue and Advanced
Resistive Exercise Device (ARED) is shown in red. b Speciﬁc blood markers which
contain data points for pre-launch (L−) and return to Earth (R+). c Speciﬁc urine
markers which contain data points for pre-launch (L−), ﬂight (FD), and return to
Earth (R+). The statistics on the data are *p < 0.001 for signiﬁcantly different from
L-45 and ‡p < 0.01 signiﬁcantly different from ARED.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
12

housed males, while RR-5 and RR-7 mice are multi-housed females,
introducing additional variables that may contribute to the observed
disparities100–103.
Skin has an anatomically heterogeneous gene expression proﬁle104. For
instance, ﬁbroblasts exhibit distinct gene expression patterns based on their
positional identity in relation to the major anatomical axis105. This phe-
nomenon in part explains the predisposition of different sites to different
skin conditions104. Although several genes related to collagen synthesis and
ECM were downregulated across all four MHU-2 experimental groups,
some of these genes showed statistical signiﬁcance in the dorsal group but
not in the femoral group (Fig. 5a). Likewise in the RR-5 mission, during
terrestrial recovery, skin biopsies obtained from dorsal skin generally
showed a higher reversal of gene expression pattern compared to those
obtained from the femoral skin (Figs. 3a and 5a). These changes may be
indicative of the variations in gene expression proﬁle, their adaptation
response to space ﬂight and re-adaptation to terrestrial environment, at
different anatomical sites.
Skin biopsies collected from i4 astronauts one day post-ﬂight exhibited
a marked downregulation of various collagen/ECM-associated genes in the
dermal layer compared to pre-ﬂight conditions (e.g., SPARC, COL1A1,
COL3A1, COL6A1) (Fig. 5b). However, certain genes, such as SPARC and
COL3A1, showed an upregulation in one or both compartments of the
epidermis (Fig. 5b). Moreover, several other collagen/ECM associated genes
(e.g. COL14A1, COL15A1, MMP3) were upregulated in both epidermis and
the dermis (Fig. 5b). As with the MHU-2 mice, the i4 astronauts’ skin
biopsies were obtained one-day post-ﬂight, so some of these effects may
have been induced by hypergravity. Nevertheless, blood data obtained from
the same i4 astronauts at 1-, 45-, and 82-days post-ﬂight suggests that most
gene alterations observed upon landing revert back to normal levels within
82 days following ﬂight, so we may expect a similar response in the skin
tissue (Supplementary Figs. 2c and 3c). Previously reported ﬁndings from
the NASA Twins showed in-ﬂight activation of collagen formation path-
ways and an increase in COL1A1 and COL3A1 proteins detected in the
urine, indicative of structural remodeling19. These changes, as with the
majority of spaceﬂight-induced changes, were also reported to revert to
baseline post-ﬂight19.
Some of the changes reported by astronauts during and after space-
ﬂight, such as dryness and contact dermatitis, point to an impaired barrier
function17,95 our results support this hypothesis. FLG is a gene expressed in
the stratum granulosum layer of the epidermis, during the epidermal dif-
ferentiation process41. It encodes proﬁlaggrin, a major component of ker-
atohyalin granules found in the keratinocytes that is dephosphorylated and
cleaved into ﬁlaggrin106,107. During conversion of keratinocyte cell mem-
brane to corniﬁedcell envelope, ﬁlaggrin aggregates and aligns intermediate
ﬁlaments such as keratin 1 and keratin 10, within the cytoskeleton of ker-
atinocytes, and subsequently a cross-linking process is initiated by proteins
such as involucrin and locicrin108,109. This results in compactization and
ﬂattening of the corneocytes, one of the constituents of the skin barrier110.
We identiﬁed FLG as one of the cross-mission genes in the spaceﬂight vs
ground control mice data with downregulation across the majority of data
subsets (all except RR-5 dorsal skin) (Fig. 3a). Additionally, we observed
post-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight downregulation of FLG in the epidermis of i4
astronauts (Fig. 5b). Caspase-14, an enzyme encoded by the CASP14 gene,
cleaves ﬁlaggrin, breaking it down into free amino acids. These amino acids
serveasintegralcomponentsofnaturalmoisturizingfactors,contributingto
the preservation of skin hydration and pH111. Additionally, they play a
crucial role in antimicrobial defense, further contributing to the multi-
faceted functions of the skin barrier61,112,113. Similar to FLG, CASP14
demonstrated downregulation in the majority of murine skin subsets
(excluding RR-5 dorsal skin) (Fig. 3a), the epidermal layer of i4 astronaut
skin tissue (Fig. 5b), and JAXA hair follicles (Fig. 5c). This observation is
important considering the crucial role CASP14 plays in skin barrier for-
mation and its involvement in skin conditions such as contact dermatitis
and atopic dermatitis53,61,62,114. The link between ﬁlaggrin deﬁciency and dry
skin, altered pH, atopic and contact dermatitis, and ichthyosis vulgaris is
also well-known54,60,112,115–117.
CASP14 was also the driver of one of the two main QLattice models we
found to be maximally relevant and minimally redundant among the cross-
mission genes, resulting in a very simple model involving only CASP14 and
S1PR1 with an AUC of 0.85 (Fig. 3d). S1PR1 was upregulated in most
murine skin subsets (Fig. 3a), the in-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight samples from the
JAXAhairfolliclestudy(Fig.4b),andinallcompartmentsforthepost-ﬂight
vspre-ﬂighti4astronauts’skinsamples(Fig.4a).IntheRR-5mission,aftera
30-day recovery, in-ﬂight effects may have been reversed as S1PR1
expression was downregulated (Fig. 3a), which is also consistent with
downregulation in the post-ﬂight vs pre-ﬂight samples from the JAXA hair
follicle study (Fig. 4b). Downregulation of S1PR1 has been reported to be
necessary for activation of resident memory CD8 + T cells in skin35 and has
previously been observed in CD8 + T cells from murine skin during
response to Herpes Simplex Virus Infection118. While the S1P-S1PR axis has
Fig. 9 | Predicted drug signatures associated with spaceﬂight response in the skin.
Predicted drug signatures using the cross-mission genes across each dataset repre-
sented by a hierarchically clustered heat map. A positive (red) activation state
implies cross-mission gene expression changes are consistent with expression
changes observed with the indicated drug from curated causal gene expression
relationship studies. A negative (blue) activation state implies the cross-mission gene
expression changes are opposite to changes observed with the indicated drug.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
13

inhibitoryrolesinkeratinocyte proliferation, it was also shownto contribute
to the process of chemotaxis119. For instance, in Staphylococcus-aureus-
stimulated keratinocytes; TNF alpha, IL-8 and IL-36γ release was induced
via involvement of S1PR1 and S1PR2120. Higher expression levels of S1PR1
and S1PR2 observed in the skin of impetigo patients and changes in the
distribution patterns of these receptors were also aligned with these
ﬁndings120. Herpes Simplex Virus reactivation3,4,95 and Staphylococcus
colonizationintheskin10,17,121(whichcould alsobeinﬂuencedbybreakdown
of ﬁlaggrin altering pH levels122) have been widely reported in astronauts,
therefore alterations in S1PR1, CASP14, and FLG, are of importance.
At present, there is a lack of widely accepted countermeasures to
effectively mitigate the damage caused to the skin induced by exposure to the
space environment. Our analysis has identiﬁed drugs capable of altering
similar molecular changes that manifest in the skin during spaceﬂight
(Fig. 9). Several drugs, including calcitriol, tretinoin, and tamoxifen showed
signiﬁcant positive correlation with regulatory changes in all data subsets
from the MHU-2 and RR-7 missions except for the C3H/HeJ mice samples
collected at the 25-day time point (Fig. 9). Tretinoin, a vitamin A derivative is
a retinoid known for its applications in treating acne and leukemia, exerts its
effects through the activation of retinoic acid receptors, inﬂuencing various
skin processes such as increased proliferation and inhibited differentiation of
epidermal cells, increased keratinocyte turnover, increased collagen synth-
esis, inhibited UV radiation induced metalloproteinase activity, and melanin
reduction23,123,124. Tretinoin treatment on reconstructed human epidermis
was shown to induce loss of keratohyalin granules and reduce ﬁlaggrin and
Keratin 10 expression125. Retinoids have also been observed to downregulate
caspase-14 expression in in-vitro reconstructed skin models126. Dry skin and
exfoliation are common side effects during its use123. Tamoxifen, a selective
estrogen receptor modulator, has been shown to exhibit both agoniztic and
antagonistic effects depending on the tissue94. Its use in breast cancer patients
is linked to cutaneous adverse events, including dry skin, itching, and
occasionally radiation recall dermatitis and baboon syndrome (a Type IV
hypersensitivity reaction)126–129. Furthermore, tamoxifen induces androgen
receptor expression in hair follicles, leading to tamoxifen-induced alopecia in
some cases130, and abnormal hair follicles, epidermal atrophy and dermal
ﬁbrosis have been observed in rat models131. On the other hand, only ola-
parib, estrogen, and diethylstilbestrol (a synthetic form of estrogen) showed
an opposing pattern, with signiﬁcant negative correlation in all data subsets
except for those from the RR-5 mission and the C3H/HeJ mice samples
collected at the 25-day time point of the RR-7 mission (Fig. 9). Estrogen
plays a crucial role in skin health, inﬂuencing keratinocyte function, collagen
production, moisture retention and telogen-anagen follicle transition132–135. In
an explant model of fetal rat skin development, estrogen was shown to
increase ﬁlaggrin expression136. Conversely, estrogen deﬁciency during
menopause is associated with adverse skin changes such as loss of collagen,
skin dryness and atrophy137,138. Overall, molecular alterations observed in the
space ﬂown mice and astronaut skin data show similarities with molecular
effects associated with drugs like tretinoin and tamoxifen123, such as FLG and
CASP14 downregulation, while symptoms reported in astronauts including
dry skin and dermatitis also resemble side effects associated with drugs like
tretinoin and tamoxifen106 (Fig. 9). Topical moisturizers and emollients, as
commonly used by astronauts15,95, may help to counteract the physiological
consequences of disrupted barrier function genes, and may also help to
explain why results on impact of spaceﬂight on skin physiological para-
meters in astronauts have been mixed14,15, despite physiological evidence of
skin damage in space ﬂown rodents12.
In conclusion, we have provided a comprehensive study on the impact
of spaceﬂight on skin health. Currently, there is a gap in knowledge for how
space radiation and microgravity affects skin biology, yet many of the
common themes of spaceﬂight dysfunction emerged in our analysis, sug-
gesting that skin could be an easily-accessible candidate for studying the
biological impact of spaceﬂight. Our systems biology analysis revealed some
genes of interest and potential mechanisms to investigate in the context of
countermeasures that can be utilized in future studies. We believe with our
study we have started to address the current gaps and provided some clues
on how to potentially mitigate the adverse effects of the space environment
to the skin.
The rodent datasets used come from three different spaceﬂight
experiments with a variety of confounding variables associated with dif-
ferences in study design. This means that direct comparison between the
experimentsis challenging, butindeedthisalso presents anopportunityto
hypothesize how these factors may inﬂuence biology, as done in this
manuscript. A lack of physiological data, such as dermal thickness, and
lack of individual skin layer data from the rodent datasets means that
generated hypotheses relating to mouse physiology cannot be conﬁrmed
without follow-up investigations, but the comparison to astronaut data
helps translate the results to human relevance. Lastly, gene expression
levels differ between skin compartments so an identical fold-change value
in a layer where the speciﬁc gene expression is generally low may not
represent the same magnitude in a layer where the same gene’s expression
is relatively greater. As such, for the i4 skin data we focused on changes in
the compartments where the gene is established to be predominantly
expressed.
Data availability
For all the sequenced data underlying the plots in this manuscript the
datasets used are publicly available via the NASA OSDR’s Biological Data
Management Environment (https://osdr.nasa.gov/bio/repo), including
murineskin RNA-Seq datasets(OSD-238,OSD-239,OSD-240,OSD-241,
OSD-254),microarray data from theJAXA hair study (OSD-174),and the
JAXA CFE data (OSD-530). To create the UMAP plot in Fig. 1b, the
normalized count data from all datasets was used. Genes where more than
25% of samples had identical expression levels were dropped, and from
the remaining 75% of genes, we furthermore dropped genes with a var-
iance of less than 1.7. The normalized count data used for the UMAP plot
can be found at NASA Open Science Data Repository (OSDR), at the
following links: OSD-238, OSD-239, OSD-240, OSD-241, and OSD-254.
For each dataset, scroll down and click on Files -> GeneLab Processed
RNA-Seq Files -> Normalized counts data. The source data for the rest of
theﬁgures are available in Supplementary Data 4. Deposited data from the
sequencing data from the NASA Twin Study can be found on the NASA
Life Sciences Data Archive (LSDA) and the accession code is not available
due to privacy concerns. The astronaut physiological data is also available
through LSDA due to privacy concerns. LSDA is the repository for all
human and animal research data, including that associated with this
study. LSDA has a public facing portal where data requests can be
initiated139. The LSDA team provides the appropriate processes, tools, and
secure infrastructure for archival of experimental data and dissemination
while complying with applicable rules, regulations, policies, and proce-
dures governing the management and archival of sensitive data and
information.TheLSDAteamenablesdata andinformation dissemination
to the public or to authorized personnel either by providing public access
to information or via an approved request process for information and
data fromtheLSDA in accordance with NASA Human Research Program
and JSC Institutional Review Board direction. The Inspiration4 data has
been uploaded to two data repositories: the NASA Open Science Data
Repository (osdr.nasa.gov; comprised of NASA GeneLab and the NASA
Ames Life Sciences Data Archive [ALSDA]), and the TrialX database.
Identiﬁers for publicly downloadable datasets in the OSDR are docu-
mented as follows: 1) Data can be visualized online through the SOMA
Browser (https://soma.weill.cornell.edu/apps/I4_Multiome/), the single-
cell browser (https://soma.weill.cornell.edu/apps/I4_Multiome/), and the
microbiome
browser
(https://soma.weill.cornell.edu/apps/I4_
Microbiome/) and 2) for the PBMC data the data is available with
OSDR accession ID: OSD-570 and the following link: https://osdr.nasa.
gov/bio/repo/data/studies/OSD-570/.
Code availability
Processing scripts used for rodent data are available via Github: https://
github.com/henrycope/spaceﬂight-skin-transcriptomics.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
14

Received: 11 January 2023; Accepted: 23 May 2024;
References
1.
Afshinnekoo, E. et al. Fundamental Biological Features of
Spaceﬂight: Advancing the Field to Enable Deep-Space Exploration.
Cell 183, 1162–1184 (2020).
2.
Crucian, B. et al. Incidence of clinical symptoms during long-
duration orbital spaceﬂight. Int. J. Gen. Med. 9, 383–391 (2016).
3.
Rooney, B. V., Crucian, B. E., Pierson, D. L., Laudenslager, M. L. &
Mehta, S. K. Herpes Virus Reactivation in Astronauts During
Spaceﬂight and Its Application on Earth. Front. Microbiol. 10,
16 (2019).
4.
Mehta, S. K. et al. Dermatitis during Spaceﬂight Associated with
HSV-1 Reactivation. Viruses 14, 789 (2022).
5.
Crucian, B. et al. A case of persistent skin rash and rhinitis with
immune system dysregulation onboard the International Space
Station. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 4, 759–762.e8 (2016).
6.
Law, J., Gilmore, S. & Kelly, S. Postﬂight Rash and Skin Sensitivity
Following a Year-Long Spaceﬂight Mission. Aerosp Med Hum
Perform 91, 604–607 (2020).
7.
Linnarsson, D. et al. Toxicity of lunar dust. Planet. Space Sci. 74,
57–71 (2012).
8.
Avila-Herrera, A. et al. Crewmember microbiome may inﬂuence
microbial composition of ISS habitable surfaces. PLoS One 15,
e0231838 (2020).
9.
Sugita,T. et al.Comprehensive analysis of the skinfungal microbiota
of astronauts during a half-year stay at the International Space
Station. Med. Mycol. 54, 232–239 (2016).
10.
Xiao, S., Venkateswaran, K. J. & Jiang, S. C. The risk of
Staphylococcus skin infection during space travel and mitigation
strategies. Microbial Risk Anal. 11, 23–30 (2019).
11.
Mao, X. W. et al. Biological and metabolic response in STS-135
space-ﬂown mouse skin. Free Radic. Res. 48, 890–897 (2014).
12.
Neutelings, T. et al. Skin physiology in microgravity: a 3-month stay
aboard ISS induces dermal atrophy and affects cutaneous muscle
and hair follicles cycling in mice. NPJ Microgravity 1, 15002
(2015).
13.
Terada, M. et al. Effects of a Closed Space Environment on Gene
Expression in Hair Follicles of Astronauts in the International Space
Station. PLoS One 11, e0150801 (2016).
14.
Heinrich, H. T. M. W. Change in skin physiological parameters in
space - report on and results of the ﬁrst study on man. Skin
Pharmacol. Physiol. 21, 283–292 (2008).
15.
Braun, N. et al. Current Data on Effects of Long-Term Missions on
the International Space Station on Skin Physiological Parameters.
Skin Pharmacol. Physiol. 32, 43–51 (2019).
16.
Jones, C. W. et al. Molecular and physiologic changes in the SpaceX
Inspiration4 civilian crew. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
024-07648-x (2024).
17.
Park, J. et al. Spatial multi-omics of human skin reveals KRAS and
inﬂammatory responses to spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-024-48625-2 (2024).
18.
Matsuda, C. et al. Dietary intervention of mice using an improved
Multiple Artiﬁcial-gravity Research System (MARS) under artiﬁcial 1
g. NPJ Microgravity 5, 16 (2019).
19.
Garrett-Bakelman, F. E. et al. The NASA Twins Study: A
multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceﬂight.
Science 364, eaau8650 (2019).
20.
Overbey, E. G. et al. NASA GeneLab RNA-seq consensus pipeline:
standardized processing of short-read RNA-seq data. iScience 24,
102361 (2021).
21.
Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome
Biol. 15, 550 (2014).
22.
Bray, N. L., Pimentel, H., Melsted, P. & Pachter, L. Near-optimal
probabilistic RNA-seq quantiﬁcation. Nat. Biotechnol. 34,
525–527 (2016).
23.
Voorhees, J. J. Clinical effects of long-term therapy with topical
tretinoin and cellular mode of action. J. Int. Med. Res. 18,
26C–28C (1990).
24.
Rosenfeld, J. A., Mason, C. E. & Smith, T. M. Limitations of the
human reference genome for personalized genomics. PLoS One 7,
e40294 (2012).
25.
Muratani, M. Cell-free RNA analysis of plasma samples collected
from six astronauts in JAXA Cell-Free Epigenome (CFE) Study.
https://doi.org/10.26030/r2xr-h714 (2022).
26.
Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for
RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43,
e47 (2015).
27.
Overbey, E. et al. The Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA): A
comprehensive data resource and biobank for astronauts. Nature
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07639-y (2024).
28.
Stuart, T. et al. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell
177, 1888–1902.e21 (2019).
29.
Barisic, D. et al. ARID1A orchestrates SWI/SNF-mediated sequential
binding of transcription factors with ARID1A loss driving pre-
memory B cell fate and lymphomagenesis. Cancer Cell 42,
583–604.e11 (2024).
30.
Smith, S. M., Heer, M., Wang, Z., Huntoon, C. L. & Zwart, S. R. Long-
duration space ﬂight and bed rest effects on testosterone and other
steroids. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 97, 270–278 (2012).
31.
Zwart, S. R. et al. Genotype, B-vitamin status, and androgens affect
spaceﬂight-induced ophthalmic changes. FASEB J. 30,
141–148 (2016).
32.
Abzu, A. I. Feyn Software. https://pypi.org/project/feyn/ (2024).
33.
Itadani, H., Mizuarai, S. & Kotani, H. Can systems biology
understand pathway activation? Gene expression signatures as
surrogate markers for understanding the complexity of pathway
activation. Curr. Genomics 9, 349–360 (2008).
34.
Christensen, N. J. et al. Identifying interactions in omics data for
clinical biomarker discovery using symbolic regression.
Bioinformatics 38, 3749–3758 (2022).
35.
Elsborg, J. & Salvatore, M. Using LLMs and Explainable ML to
Analyze Biomarkers at Single-Cell Level for Improved
Understanding of Diseases. Biomolecules 13, 1516 (2023).
36.
McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Astels, S. hdbscan: Hierarchical density
based clustering. J. Open Source Softw. 2, 205 (2017).
37.
Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-
based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 102, 15545–15550 (2005).
38.
Chen, E. Y. et al. Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene
list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinformatics 14, 128 (2013).
39.
Krämer, A., Green,J., Pollard, J. Jr & Tugendreich, S. Causal analysis
approaches in Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Bioinformatics 30,
523–530 (2014).
40.
Ray, S. et al. GeneLab: Omics database for spaceﬂight experiments.
Bioinformatics 35, 1753–1759 (2019).
41.
Murray, J. C. Radiation-induced ﬁbrosis: the structure/function
relationship. Scanning Microsc. 8, 79–85 (1994).
42.
Klaus, R., Niyazi, M. & Lange-Sperandio, B. Radiation-induced
kidney toxicity: molecular and cellular pathogenesis. Radiat. Oncol.
16, 43 (2021).
43.
Tian, J., Pecaut, M. J., Slater, J. M. & Gridley, D. S. Spaceﬂight
modulates expression of extracellular matrix, adhesion, and
proﬁbrotic molecules in mouse lung. J. Appl. Physiol. 108,
162–171 (2010).
44.
Howell, G. R. et al. Radiation treatment inhibits monocyte entry into
the optic nerve head and prevents neuronal damage in a mouse
model of glaucoma. J. Clin. Invest. 122, 1246–1261 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
15

45.
Akiyama, T. et al. How does spaceﬂight affect the acquired immune
system? NPJ Microgravity 6, 14 (2020).
46.
Vilà-Brau, A., De Sousa-Coelho, A. L., Mayordomo, C., Haro, D. &
Marrero, P. F. Human HMGCS2 regulates mitochondrial fatty acid
oxidation and FGF21 expression in HepG2 cell line. J. Biol. Chem.
286, 20423–20430 (2011).
47.
Perry,J. R. B. et al. Stratifying type 2 diabetes casesby BMI identiﬁes
genetic risk variants in LAMA1 and enrichment for risk variants in
lean compared to obese cases. PLoS Genet. 8, e1002741 (2012).
48.
Neve, B. et al. Role of transcription factor KLF11 and its diabetes-
associated gene variants in pancreatic beta cell function. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102, 4807–4812 (2005).
49.
Parikh, H. et al. TXNIP regulates peripheral glucose metabolism in
humans. PLoS Med. 4, e158 (2007).
50.
Peterson, J. M. etal. CTRP9transgenicmiceare protected fromdiet-
induced obesity and metabolic dysfunction. Am. J. Physiol. Regul.
Integr. Comp. Physiol. 305, R522–R533 (2013).
51.
de Souza, G. O., Wasinski, F. & Donato, J. Jr. Characterization of the
metabolic differences between male and female C57BL/6 mice. Life
Sci. 301, 120636 (2022).
52.
Skon, C. N. et al. Transcriptional downregulation of S1pr1 is required
for the establishment of resident memory CD8+ T cells. Nat.
Immunol. 14, 1285–1293 (2013).
53.
Jung, M. et al. Pyrrolidone carboxylic acid levels or caspase-14
expression in the corneocytes of lesional skin correlates with clinical
severity, skin barrier function and lesional inﬂammation in atopic
dermatitis. J. Dermatol. Sci. 76, 231–239 (2014).
54.
Winge, M. C. G. et al. Filaggrin genotype determines functional and
molecular alterations in skin of patients with atopic dermatitis and
ichthyosis vulgaris. PLoS One 6, e28254 (2011).
55.
Liu, M. et al. Non‑invasive proteome‑wide quantiﬁcation of skin
barrier‑related proteins using label‑free LC‑MS/MS analysis. Mol.
Med. Rep. 21, 2227–2235 (2020).
56.
Deing, V. et al. Oxytocin modulates proliferation and stress
responses of human skin cells: implications for atopic dermatitis.
Exp. Dermatol. 22, 399–405 (2013).
57.
Chai, Z. et al. 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type XI
localizes to human steroidogenic cells. Endocrinology 144,
2084–2091 (2003).
58.
Edqvist, P.-H. D. et al. Expression of human skin-speciﬁc genes
deﬁned by transcriptomics and antibody-based proﬁling. J.
Histochem. Cytochem. 63, 129–141 (2015).
59.
Wallmeyer, L. et al. TSLP is a direct trigger for T cell migration in
ﬁlaggrin-deﬁcient skin equivalents. Sci. Rep. 7, 774 (2017).
60.
Lagrelius, M. et al. Filaggrin gene mutations in relation to contact
allergy and hand eczema in adolescence. Contact Dermatitis 82,
147–152 (2020).
61.
Markiewicz, A., Sigorski, D., Markiewicz, M., Owczarczyk-
Saczonek, A. & Placek, W. Caspase-14-From Biomolecular Basics
to Clinical Approach. A Review of Available Data. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22,
5575 (2021).
62.
Hvid, M. et al. Regulation of caspase 14 expression in keratinocytes
by inﬂammatory cytokines–a possible link between reduced skin
barrier function and inﬂammation? Exp. Dermatol. 20,
633–636 (2011).
63.
Radstake, W. E., Baselet, B., Baatout, S. & Verslegers, M.
Spaceﬂight Stressors and Skin Health. Biomedicines 10, 364 (2022).
64.
Pavan, W. J. & Sturm, R. A. The Genetics of Human Skin and Hair
Pigmentation. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 20, 41–72 (2019).
65.
Mirastschijski, U. et al. Matrix Metalloproteinase-3 is Key Effector of
TNF-α-Induced Collagen Degradation in Skin. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20,
5234 (2019).
66.
Min, M. et al. Role of keratin 24 in human epidermal keratinocytes.
PLoS One 12, e0174626 (2017).
67.
Jackson, B. et al. Late corniﬁed envelope family in differentiating
epithelia–response to calcium and ultraviolet irradiation. J. Invest.
Dermatol. 124, 1062–1070 (2005).
68.
Bergboer, J. G. M. et al. Psoriasis risk genes of the late corniﬁed
envelope-3 group are distinctly expressed compared with genes of
other LCE groups. Am. J. Pathol. 178, 1470–1477 (2011).
69.
Kretz, R. et al. Defect in proline synthesis: pyrroline-5-carboxylate
reductase 1 deﬁciency leads to a complex clinical phenotype with
collagen and elastin abnormalities. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 34,
731–739 (2011).
70.
Kuivaniemi, H. & Tromp, G. Type III collagen (COL3A1): Gene and
protein structure, tissue distribution, and associated diseases. Gene
707, 151–171 (2019).
71.
D’hondt, S. et al. Type III collagen affects dermal and vascular
collagen ﬁbrillogenesis and tissue integrity in a mutant Col3a1
transgenic mouse model. Matrix Biol. 70, 72–83 (2018).
72.
Giesen, M. et al. Ageing processes inﬂuence keratin and KAP
expression in human hair follicles. Exp. Dermatol. 20,
759–761 (2011).
73.
Brady, A. F. et al. The Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, rare types. Am. J.
Med. Genet. C Semin. Med. Genet. 175, 70–115 (2017).
74.
Beheshti, A. et al. Genomic Changes Driven by Radiation-Induced
DNA Damage and Microgravity in Human Cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22,
10507 (2021).
75.
Roderick, T. H. The response of twenty-seven inbred strains of mice
to daily doses of whole-body x-irradiation. Radiat. Res. 20,
631–639 (1963).
76.
Mukherjee, S., Sainis, K. B. & Deobagkar, D. D. F1 hybrids of BALB/c
and C57BL/6 mouse strains respond differently to low-dose ionizing
radiation exposure. J. Genet. 93, 667–682 (2014).
77.
Cekanaviciute, E. et al. Mouse genomic associations with in vitro
sensitivity to simulated space radiation. Life Sci. Space Res. 36,
47–58 (2023).
78.
da Silveira, W. A. et al. Comprehensive Multi-omics Analysis Reveals
Mitochondrial Stress as a Central Biological Hub for Spaceﬂight
Impact. Cell 183, 1185–1201.e20 (2020).
79.
Sreedhar, A., Aguilera-Aguirre, L. & Singh, K. K. Mitochondria in skin
health, aging, and disease. Cell Death Dis. 11, 444 (2020).
80.
Achouri, Y. et al. Identiﬁcation of a dehydrogenase acting on D-2-
hydroxyglutarate. Biochem. J. 381, 35–42 (2004).
81.
Smith, S. M. et al. Beneﬁts for bone from resistance exercise and
nutrition in long-duration spaceﬂight: Evidence from biochemistry
and densitometry. J. Bone Miner. Res. 27, 1896–1906 (2012).
82.
Smith, S. M. et al. Bone metabolism and renal stone risk during
International Space Station missions. Bone 81, 712–720 (2015).
83.
Mostafa, W. Z. & Hegazy, R. A. Vitamin D and the skin: Focus on a
complex relationship: A review. J. Advert. Res. 6, 793–804 (2015).
84.
Rid, R. et al. Deciphering the calcitriol-induced transcriptomic
response in keratinocytes: presentation of novel target genes. J.
Mol. Endocrinol. 50, 131–149 (2013).
85.
Alia, E. & Kerr, P. E. Vitamin D: Skin, sunshine, and beyond. Clin.
Dermatol. 39, 840–846 (2021).
86.
Li, M. et al. Topical vitamin D3 and low-calcemic analogs induce
thymic stromal lymphopoietin in mouse keratinocytes and trigger an
atopic dermatitis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103,
11736–11741 (2006).
87.
Hong, S. P. et al. Topical calcitriol restores the impairment of
epidermal permeability and antimicrobial barriers induced by
corticosteroids. Br. J. Dermatol. 162, 1251–1260 (2010).
88.
Broome, J. D. L-Asparaginase: discovery and development as a
tumor-inhibitory agent. Cancer Treat. Rep. 65, 111–114 (1981).
89.
Burke, M. J. & Zalewska-Szewczyk, B. Hypersensitivity reactions to
asparaginase therapy in acute lymphoblastic leukemia: immunology
and clinical consequences. Fut. Oncol. 18, 1285–1299 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
16

90.
Yoham, A. L. & Casadesus, D. Tretinoin. In StatPearls (StatPearls
Publishing, 2023).
91.
Thornton, M. J. Estrogens and aging skin. Dermatoendocrinol 5,
264–270 (2013).
92.
Boyd, A. S. & King, L. E. Jr. Tamoxifen-induced remission of
psoriasis. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 41, 887–889 (1999).
93.
Lee, O. et al. A randomized phase II presurgical trial of transdermal
4-hydroxytamoxifen gel versus oral tamoxifen in women with ductal
carcinoma in situ of the breast. Clin. Cancer Res. 20,
3672–3682 (2014).
94.
Gallo, M. A. & Kaufman, D. Antagonistic and agonistic effects of
tamoxifen: signiﬁcance in human cancer. Semin. Oncol. 24,
S1–71–S1–80 (1997).
95.
Nguyen, C. N. & Urquieta, E. Contemporary review of dermatologic
conditions in space ﬂight and future implications for long-duration
exploration missions. Life Sci. Space Res. 36, 147–156 (2023).
96.
Reynolds, R. et al. Cancer incidence and mortality in the USA
Astronaut Corps, 1959-2017. Occup. Environ. Med. 78,
869–875 (2021).
97.
Oka, S. et al. Human mitochondrial transcriptional factor A breaks
the mitochondria-mediated vicious cycle in Alzheimer’s disease.
Sci. Rep. 6, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep37889 (2016).
98.
Xu, W. et al. Oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate is a competitive
inhibitor of α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases. Cancer Cell
19, 17–30 (2011).
99.
Seitzer, U., Bodo, M., Müller, P. K., Açil, Y. & Bätge, B. Microgravity
and hypergravity effects on collagen biosynthesis of human dermal
ﬁbroblasts. Cell Tissue Res. 282, 513–517 (1995).
100.
Kahan, V., Andersen, M. L., Tomimori, J. & Tuﬁk, S. Stress, immunity
and skin collagen integrity: evidence from animal models and clinical
conditions. Brain Behav. Immun. 23, 1089–1095 (2009).
101.
Stowe, R. P., Pierson, D. L. & Barrett, A. D. Elevated stress hormone
levels relate to Epstein-Barr virus reactivation in astronauts.
Psychosom. Med. 63, 891–895 (2001).
102.
Horii, A. et al. Hippocampal gene expression, serum cortisol level,
and spatial memory in rats exposed to hypergravity. J. Vestib. Res.
27, 209–215 (2017).
103.
Kim, J. et al. Single-cell multi-ome and immune proﬁles of the
Inspiration4 crew reveal conserved, cell-type, and sex-speciﬁc
responses to spaceﬂight. Nat. Commun. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-49211-2 (2024).
104.
Yan, Y. et al. Transcriptomic Heterogeneity of Skin Across Different
Anatomic Sites. J. Invest. Dermatol. 143, 398–407.e5 (2023).
105.
Rinn, J. L., Bondre, C., Gladstone, H. B., Brown, P. O. & Chang, H. Y.
Anatomic demarcation by positional variation in ﬁbroblast gene
expression programs. PLoS Genet. 2, e119 (2006).
106.
Resing, K. A., Walsh, K. A., Haugen-Scoﬁeld, J. & Dale, B. A.
Identiﬁcation of proteolytic cleavage sites in the conversion of
proﬁlaggrin to ﬁlaggrin in mammalian epidermis. J. Biol. Chem. 264,
1837–1845 (1989).
107.
Rosso, J. D., Zeichner, J., Alexis, A., Cohen, D. & Berson, D.
Understanding the Epidermal Barrier in Healthy and Compromised
Skin: Clinically Relevant Information for the Dermatology
Practitioner: Proceedings of an Expert Panel Roundtable Meeting. J.
Clin. Aesthet. Dermatol. 9, S2–S8 (2016).
108.
Brown, S. J. & Irvine, A. D. Atopic eczema and the ﬁlaggrin story.
Semin. Cutan. Med. Surg. 27, 128–137 (2008).
109.
Nithya, S., Radhika, T. & Jeddy, N. Loricrin - an overview. J. Oral
Maxillofac. Pathol. 19, 64–68 (2015).
110.
Ishitsuka, Y. & Roop, D. R. Loricrin at the Boundary between Inside
and Outside. Biomolecules 12, 673 (2022).
111.
Ye, Y.-M., Kim, B. E., Shin, Y.-S., Park, H.-S. & Leung, D. Y. M.
Increased epidermal ﬁlaggrin in chronic idiopathic urticaria is
associated with severity of urticaria. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol.
112, 533–538 (2014).
112.
Denecker, G., Ovaere, P., Vandenabeele, P. & Declercq, W.
Caspase-14 reveals its secrets. J. Cell Biol. 180, 451–458 (2008).
113.
Čepelak, I., Dodig, S. & Pavić, I. Filaggrin and atopic march.
Biochem. Med. 29, 020501 (2019).
114.
Kirchmeier, P., Zimmer, A., Bouadjar, B., Rösler, B. & Fischer, J.
Whole-Exome-Sequencing Reveals Small Deletions in CASP14 in
Patients with Autosomal Recessive Inherited Ichthyosis. Acta Derm.
Venereol. 97, 102–104 (2017).
115.
Ye, Y. M., Kim, B. E., Shin, Y. S., Park, H.-S. & Leung, D. Y. M.
Overexpression of Epidermal Filaggrin in Patients with Chronic
Idiopathic Urticaria Correlates with Urticaria Severity. J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol. 131, AB56 (2013).
116.
Smith, F. J. D. et al. Loss-of-function mutations in the gene encoding
ﬁlaggrin cause ichthyosis vulgaris. Nat. Genet. 38, 337–342 (2006).
117.
Palmer, C. N. A. et al. Common loss-of-function variants of the
epidermal barrier protein ﬁlaggrin are a major predisposing factor for
atopic dermatitis. Nat. Genet. 38, 441–446 (2006).
118.
Mackay, L. K. et al. The developmental pathway for CD103(+)CD8+
tissue-resident memory T cells of skin. Nat. Immunol. 14,
1294–1301 (2013).
119.
Masuda-Kuroki, K. & Di Nardo, A. Sphingosine 1-Phosphate
Signaling at the Skin Barrier Interface. Biology 11, 809 (2022).
120.
Igawa, S. et al. Human Keratinocytes Use Sphingosine 1-Phosphate
and its Receptors to Communicate Staphylococcus aureus Invasion
and Activate Host Defense. J. Invest. Dermatol. 139,
1743–1752.e5 (2019).
121.
Morrison, M. D. et al. Investigation of Spaceﬂight Induced Changes
to Astronaut Microbiomes. Front. Microbiol. 12, 659179 (2021).
122.
Ogonowska, P., Gilaberte, Y., Barańska-Rybak, W. & Nakonieczna,
J. Colonization With Staphylococcus aureus in Atopic Dermatitis
Patients: Attempts to Reveal the Unknown. Front. Microbiol. 11,
567090 (2020).
123.
Baldwin, H. E. et al. 40 years of topical tretinoin use in review. J.
Drugs Dermatol. 12, 638–642 (2013).
124.
Lee, D.-D. et al. Retinoid-responsive transcriptional changes in
epidermal keratinocytes. J. Cell. Physiol. 220, 427–439 (2009).
125.
Hsia, E., Johnston, M. J., Houlden, R. J., Chern, W. H. & Hoﬂand, H.
E. J. Effects of topically applied acitretin in reconstructed human
epidermis and the rhino mouse. J. Invest. Dermatol. 128,
125–130 (2008).
126.
Rendl, M. et al. Caspase-14 expression by epidermal keratinocytes
is regulated by retinoids in a differentiation-associated manner. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 119, 1150–1155 (2002).
127.
Andrew, P., Valiani, S., MacIsaac, J., Mithoowani, H. & Verma, S.
Tamoxifen-associated skin reactions in breast cancer patients: from
case report to literature review. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 148,
1–5 (2014).
128.
Moseson, D. L. et al. The use of antiestrogens tamoxifen and
nafoxidine in the treatment of human breast cancer in correlation
with estrogen receptor values. A phase II study. Cancer 41,
797–802 (1978).
129.
Mofarrah, R. et al. First report of tamoxifen-induced baboon
syndrome. J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 20, 2574–2578 (2021).
130.
Nonomura, Y., Otsuka, A., Inui, S., Miyachi, Y. & Kabashima, K.
Female pattern hair loss possibly caused by tamoxifen: Androgen
receptor expression in the outer root sheath in the affected area. J.
Dermatol. 39, 1060–1061 (2012).
131.
Inalöz, H. S. et al. The effects of tamoxifen on rat skin. Eur. J.
Gynaecol. Oncol. 23, 50–52 (2002).
132.
Murakami, K., Sawada, A., Mori, T., Sakuyama, S. & Tokudome, Y.
Effect of estrogen/progesterone ratio on the differentiation and the
barrier function of epidermal keratinocyte and three-dimensional
cultured human epidermis. Life Sci 293, 120356 (2022).
133.
Stevenson, S. & Thornton, J. Effect of estrogens on skin aging and
the potential role of SERMs. Clin. Interv. Aging 2, 283–297 (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
17

134.
Movérare, S., Lindberg, M. K., Faergemann, J., Gustafsson, J.-A. &
Ohlsson,C.Estrogenreceptoralpha,butnotestrogenreceptorbeta,
is involved in the regulation of the hair follicle cycling as well as the
thickness of epidermis in male mice. J. Invest. Dermatol. 119,
1053–1058 (2002).
135.
Oh, H. S. & Smart, R. C. An estrogen receptor pathway regulates the
telogen-anagen hair follicle transition and inﬂuences epidermal cell
proliferation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 12525–12530 (1996).
136.
Kömüves, L. G. et al. Ligands and activators of nuclear hormone
receptors regulate epidermal differentiation during fetal rat skin
development. J. Invest. Dermatol. 111, 429–433 (1998).
137.
Kamp,E., Ashraf,M., Musbahi,E. & DeGiovanni,C. Menopause,skin
and common dermatoses. Part 2: skin disorders. Clin. Exp.
Dermatol. 47, 2117–2122 (2022).
138.
Lephart, E. D. & Naftolin, F. Menopause and the Skin: Old Favorites
andNewInnovations inCosmeceuticalsfor Estrogen-DeﬁcientSkin.
Dermatol. Ther. 11, 53–69 (2021).
139.
NLSP. https://nlsp.nasa.gov/explore/lsdahome/datarequest (2024).
Acknowledgements
H.C. is supported by the Horizon Center for Doctoral Training at the
University of Nottingham (UKRI grant no. EP/S023305/1). N.S. was
supported by grants from NASA [NSSC22K0250; NSSC22K0278]. A.B. was
supported by NASA grant 16-ROSBFP_GL-0005: NNH16ZTT001N-FG
Appendix G: Solicitation of Proposals for Flight and Ground Space Biology
Research (Award Number: 80NSSC19K0883). C.E.M. thanks the World-
Quant Foundation, the GI Research Foundation, NASA (NNX14AH50G,
NNX17AB26G, 80NSSC22K0254, NNH18ZTT001N-FG2), the National
Institutes of Health (R01MH117406), and the LLS (MCL7001-18, LLS 9238-
16). J.K. thanks MOGAM Science Foundation, Boryung, and the National
Research Foundation of Korea (RS-2023-00241586).
Author contributions
Conceptualization: A.B. and H.C.; Methodology: A.B., J.E., H.C., and S.D.;
Formal Analysis: A.B., H.C., J.E., S.D., J.T.M., J.C.S., J.P., J.K., S.M.S., and
S.R.Z.; Investigation: A.B., C.E.M., H.C., J.E., and S.D.; assisting with writing
and literature review: C.W., H.P., H.U., J.C., P.A., and M.C.; astronaut
physiological data: S.M.S., S.R.Z., and M.H.; i4 data and omics: C.E.M.,
C.R.C., E.O., J.W., and J.K.; JAXA data: M.M.; Resource: A.B. and C.E.M.;
Original Draft: H.C., J.E., A.B., and N.S.; Review & Editing: H.C., J.E., J.T.M.,
C.W., H.P., H.U., M.C., J.C., S.R., P.A., S.R.Z., S.M.S., M.H., M.M., C.M.,
E.O., J.K., C.R.C., J.P., J.C.S., C.E.M., N.J.S., C.R.G.W., A.S., and A.B.;
Figures and Visualization: A.B., H.C., J.E., and S.D.; Funding Acquisition:
A.B. and C.E.M. (for i4 study); Supervision: A.B. and C.R.G.W.
Competing interests
J.E. and S.D. are afﬁliated with Abzu and Abzu is the developer of the
QLattice32, the symbolic regression-method used in this work. All other
authors have no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Afshin Beheshti.
Peer review information Communications Medicine thanks the
anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
1School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Derby DE22 3DT, UK. 2Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark. 3Abzu, Copenhagen 2150, Denmark. 4Department of Radiation Medicine, School of Medicine, Georgetown University, Washington D.C., WA 20057,
USA. 5NASA GeneLab For High Schools Program (GL4HS), Space Biology Program, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 6Department of Aerospace
and Geodesy, TUM School of Engineering and Design, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 7College of Engineering and Haas School of Business,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 8School of Engineering and Applied Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA. 9College of
Letters and Science, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 10Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Space Biosciences Division, NASA Ames
ResearchCenter,Moffettﬁeld,CA,USA. 11SpaceBiosciencesDivision,NASAAmesResearchCenter,Moffettﬁeld,CA,USA. 12DepartmentofDermatologyandAllergy,
University Hospital, LMU Munich, 80337 Munich, Germany. 13University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. 14Biomedical Research and Environmental
Sciences Division, Human Health and Performance Directorate, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX 77058, USA. 15IU International University of Applied
Sciences, Erfurt and University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. 16Transborder Medical Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. 17Department of
Genome Biology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan. 18Department of Physiology, Biophysics and Systems Biology, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 19Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA. 20McAllister Heart Institute and
DepartmentofPharmacology, TheUniversity ofNorth Carolina at Chapel Hill,Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 21Ohio Musculoskeletal andNeurological Institute, HeritageCollege
of Osteopathic Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA. 22School of Chemistry and Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford
BD7 1DP, UK. 23St John’s Institute of Dermatology, King’s College London, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, Guy’s Hospital, Great Maze Pond, London
SE1 9RT, UK. 24Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 25These authors contributed equally: Henry Cope,
Jonas Elsborg.
e-mail: afshin.beheshti@nasa.gov
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-024-00532-9
Article
Communications Medicine |  (2024) 4:106 
18
