Topical Review on ER-Golgi Transport Mechanisms in Higher Plants
Vesicles versus Tubes: Is Endoplasmic Reticulum-Golgi
Transport in Plants Fundamentally Different from
Other Eukaryotes?1
David G. Robinson*, Federica Brandizzi, Chris Hawes, and Akihiko Nakano
Centre for Organismal Studies, University of Heidelberg, D–69120 Heidelberg, Germany (D.G.R.); Department
of Plant Biology and Michigan State University-Department of Energy Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824 (F.B.); Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Oxford
Brookes University, Oxford OX3 0BP, United Kingdom (C.H.); Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate
School of Science, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113–0033, Japan (A.N.); and Live Cell Super-
Resolution Imaging Research Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Photonics, Wako, Saitama 351–0198, Japan (A.N.)
ORCID ID: 0000-0003-4856-7690 (C.H.).
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the gateway to the secretory pathway in all eukaryotic cells. Its products subsequently pass
through the Golgi apparatus on the way to the cell surface (true secretion) or to the lytic compartment of the cell (vacuolar
protein transport). In animal cells, the Golgi apparatus is present as a stationary larger order complex near the nucleus, and
transport between the cortical ER and the Golgi complex occurs via an intermediate compartment which is transported on
microtubules. By contrast, higher plant cells have discrete mobile Golgi stacks that move along the cortical ER, and the
intermediate compartment is absent. Although many of the major molecular players involved in ER-Golgi trafﬁcking in
mammalian and yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) cells have homologs in higher plants, the narrow interface (less than 500 nm)
between the Golgi and the ER, together with the motility factor, makes the identiﬁcation of the transport vectors responsible for
bidirectional trafﬁc between these two organelles much more difﬁcult. Over the years, a controversy has arisen over the two
major possibilities by which transfer can occur: through vesicles or direct tubular connections. In this article, four leading plant
cell biologists attempted to resolve this issue. Unfortunately, their opinions are so divergent and often opposing that it was not
possible to reach a consensus. Thus, we decided to let each tell his or her version individually. The review begins with an article
by Federica Brandizzi that provides the necessary molecular background on coat protein complexes in relation to the so-called
secretory units model for ER-Golgi transport in highly vacuolated plant cells. The second article, written by Chris Hawes,
presents the evidence in favor of tubules. It is followed by an article from David Robinson defending the classical notion that
transport occurs via vesicles. The last article, by Akihiko Nakano, introduces the reader to possible alternatives to vesicles or
tubules, which are now emerging as a result of exciting new developments in high-resolution light microscopy in yeast.
Cell biology textbooks usually give a description of
the Golgi apparatus as it is seen and functions in a
mammalian cell. This is understandable considering the
huge body of literature on this organelle in animal cells,
especially in relation to disease. It also reﬂects and is
designed to accommodate the large readership from the
medical sciences. With few exceptions (Ito et al., 2014),
there are few reviews on the Golgi apparatus that give a
balanced account of its structure and function across the
whole eukaryotic kingdom.
The plant Golgi apparatus is nevertheless a fascinating
organelle that has unique features, especially when com-
pared with its mammalian counterpart. It is polydisperse
rather than being present as a continuous perinuclear
ribbon, it does not disassemble during mitosis, and it is
motile. These characteristics are of great importance, es-
pecially because Golgi stacks in plants, along with their
protein processing functions, have been termed polysac-
charide factories and their activity is essential for for-
mation of a cell wall during cytokinesis and growth.
Nevertheless, it is Golgi stack motility that makes bidi-
rectional protein transport between the endoplasmic re-
ticulum (ER) and the Golgi apparatus in plants
conceptually more difﬁcult to grasp and therefore even
more intriguing than others in other eukaryotic kingdoms.
There is general consensus that in all eukaryotes, an-
terograde protein transport out of the ER is largely de-
pendent upon Coat Protein II (COII) proteins and that
retrograde transport both within the Golgi stack and
between the Golgi and the ER requires COPI proteins
(Szul and Sztul, 2011; Barlowe and Miller, 2013). Because
recruitment of proteins in yeasts and mammals culmi-
nates in the formation of a transport vesicle, it is logical
to assume that this may also be the case for plants.
However, whereas there appears to be no doubt about
the formation and release of COPI vesicles at the pe-
riphery of plant Golgi cisternae (Pimpl et al., 2000;
Donohoe et al., 2007), the existence of COPII-coated
1 This work was supported by the Chemical Sciences, Geosciences,
and Biosciences Division, Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, Ofﬁce of
Science, U.S. Department of Energy (award no. DE–FG02–91ER20021
to F.B.) and the National Science Foundation (grant no. MCB1243792
to F.B.).
* Address correspondence to david.robinson@urz.uni-heidelberg.de.
www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.15.00124
Plant Physiology, June 2015, Vol. 168, pp. 393–406, www.plantphysiol.org  2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.
393

vesicles and their operation as anterograde transport
vectors in the narrow (less than 500 nm) interface be-
tween the ER and Golgi apparatus of land plants is a
matter of considerable controversy (Hawes et al., 2008;
Hawes, 2012). By contrast, there are numerous examples
among lower eukaryotes where electron micrographs
reveal a Golgi stack immediately adjacent (less than
500 nm) to transitional ER, per deﬁnition, a domain of
the ER (or nuclear envelope) showing vesicle budding
proﬁles and lacking ribosomes. The best examples for
this are probably the yeast Pichia pastoris (Mogelsvang
et al., 2003) and the algae Chlamydomonas noctigama (Fig.
1, A and B; Hummel et al., 2007), Tribonema vulgare,
and Melosira varians (see Getty Images nos. 169272449
and 128618249; www.gettyimages.com). ER vesiculation
proﬁles have often been recorded for mammalian cells
going right back to the early papers of George Palade
(for references, see Tartakoff, 2002). Interestingly, in all of
these cases, as with the algae just mentioned, classical
chemical ﬁxation was sufﬁcient to obtain the images.
Therefore, one would expect that higher plants would be
no different in this regard. Unexpectedly, this is not the
case. So far, only in rapidly frozen samples has it been
possible to visualize ER vesiculation proﬁles. Even then,
such images are rare (Fig. 1, C and D; Robinson et al.,
2007; Kang and Staehelin, 2008; Langhans et al., 2012).
Golgi stacks are invariably associated with tubular
ER and only rarely with the edges of cisternae (Sparkes
et al., 2009b). Moreover, in highly vacuolated plant cells
such as in the leaf epidermis, Golgi stacks move (several
micrometers per second) in a stop-and-go fashion along
the surface of the ER (Boevink et al., 1998; Nebenführ
Figure 1. Electron microscopy of COPII budding. A and B, Transitional ER plus adjacent Golgi stacks in the green alga C. noctigama
as seen in chemically ﬁxed (A) and high-pressure frozen samples (B). The cis-trans (c and t) polarity of the Golgi stacks is clearly
visible and so too are budding and released COPII vesicles (arrowheads). Putative COPI vesicles are marked with arrows. C, High-
pressure frozen endosperm cell of Arabidopsis. Budding COPII vesicles are marked with arrowheads, and free putative COPII vesicles
are marked with arrows. D to G, Collage of COPII budding proﬁles. Note that many of the buds are at the termini of ER cisternae.
Note that the ER in high-pressure frozen samples is, in general, much more dilated than in chemically ﬁxed samples; in C. noctigama,
it is extremely dilated (the ER in B can be recognized by the ribosomes at the left of the vacuole-like structure). Bars = 200 nm.
394
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.

et al., 1999). This contrasts with the situation in mam-
malian cells and in the aforementioned algae, where the
ER and the Golgi are more or less stationary. So is
perhaps Golgi motility the clue to the controversy sur-
rounding COPII vesicle identiﬁcation in higher plants?
The only alternative to vesicle-mediated transport is
through some form of interconnecting tubules, either
permanent or more probably temporal in nature. If so,
the early secretory pathway of plants would appear to
be fundamentally different from that of other eukary-
otes. The purpose of this article is to examine whether
this conclusion is warranted and valid.
Four scientists who have made major contributions in
this area have come together to give their views on the
matter. However, their divergent opinions have pre-
cluded a joint review. It was therefore decided that their
opinions should appear separately. Our paper starts
with a contribution from Federica Brandizzi who sets the
scene at the molecular level, followed by two articles:
one summarizing the data pro tubules (from Chris
Hawes) and the other arguing in favor of vesicles (from
David Robinson). The ﬁnal article is from Aki Nakano,
whose recent successful application of super high-
resolution microscopy on yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
allows for new insights into ER-Golgi trafﬁcking in
higher plants. We believe that the plant sciences com-
munity cannot fail to beneﬁt from witnessing how four
experienced cell biologists perceive the current state of
play in this controversy. Although being unable to come
to a ﬁnal agreement on this issue, we dwell in the
“Conclusion” on further possible courses of action.
FEDERICA BRANDIZZI: THE SECRETORY UNITS
MODEL FOR ER PROTEIN TRANSPORT IN HIGHLY
VACUOLATED CELLS
In live-cell imaging analyses, the Arabidopsis (Ara-
bidopsis thaliana) COPII coat components (Sec13, Sec23,
Sec24, and Sec31), when expressed in highly vacuo-
lated leaf epidermal cells in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum)
and Arabidopsis, have been found in punctate struc-
tures that are associated with the ER and move with
the Golgi stacks (Stefano et al., 2006; Hanton et al.,
2007, 2009; Sieben et al., 2008; Wei and Wang, 2008;
Faso et al., 2009; Takagi et al., 2013; Tanaka et al.,
2013), which, in fully expanded plant cells, are highly
dispersed and motile (Boevink et al., 1998; Stefano
et al., 2014). The punctae labeled by the COPII coat
proteins are commonly indicated as ER exit sites
(ERESs). With the exception of Sec13, which has also
been found at the nuclear envelope (Yang et al., 2005),
Sec23, Sec24, and Sec31 are predominantly localized at
such areas. Three-dimensional projection reconstruc-
tion of confocal images followed by rendering analyses
have shown that Sec16 is localized in cup-like struc-
tures where the ER assumes a high-degree curvature
(Takagi et al., 2013; Fig. 2), supporting the intriguing
possibility for speciﬁc requirements of ER membrane
curvature for the ERES establishment and mainte-
nance. In a Sec24A partial loss-of-function mutant, a
functional ﬂuorescent protein fusion to Sec24A has
been identiﬁed also in bright structures of unknown
identity (Faso et al., 2009). It has been hypothesized
that such structures may represent ERESs in formation
or protein aggregates (Faso et al., 2009). The COPII-
recruiting guanosine triphosphate hydrolyzing-
protein (GTPase) Sar1 has been found at the ERESs but
also over the ER network to a variable degree that may
depend on the speciﬁc Sar1 isoform (Hanton et al.,
2008). The distribution of Sec16, Sar1, and the COPII
coat proteins drastically differs from that of the Sar1-
guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sec12, which has
been found distributed largely at the ER (Bar-Peled
and Raikhel, 1997; daSilva et al., 2004; Yang et al.,
2005). Similar to other eukaryotic cells, transport of
proteins in plant cells may occur by bulk ﬂow, as
Figure 2. Golgi cisternae (rat sialyltransferase transmembrane domain and cytosolic tail fused to the yellow ﬂuorescent protein, red)
and the ERES marker (SEC16-GFP, green) visualized in tobacco leaf epidermal cells. Images from time-lapse sequence acquired at the
cortical region of tobacco leaf epidermal cell with a Zeiss LSM510 confocal microscope. The Sec16 marker distributes at the peri-Golgi
area (arrowheads) as well as to structures of unknown identity that are not associated with the Golgi marker (arrows; Takagi et al., 2013).
The structures labeled by Sec16 can assume a ring-like shape (Takagi et al., 2013). Time of frames in the sequence is indicated at the left-
hand corner of images (seconds). *, A chloroplast that is visible through chlorophyll autoﬂuorescence. Bars = 5 and 1 mm (inset).
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
395
Vesicles or Tubes

demonstrated for soluble proteins (Crofts et al., 1999;
Phillipson et al., 2001), as well as in dependence of sig-
nals that can be present in the transmembrane domain
(Brandizzi et al., 2002a; Schoberer et al., 2014), or through
the presence of speciﬁc motifs that are recognized by
COPII proteins.
As it would be expected for specialized ER export
domains in which cargo is packaged for export and re-
lease to the Golgi, ERESs are dynamic entities. Photo-
bleaching experiments on ﬂuorescent protein fusions to
Sec13 and Sec24 have shown a high degree of turnover
of these proteins on and off ERESs. Functional analyses
on the effect of Sec16A loss-of-function mutation on
COPII assembly in live cells have also demonstrated that
Sec16A is involved in the dynamic association of coat
components onto the ER, because in its absence, Sec24
and Sec13 were found to cycle on and off the ERESs to a
much faster rate than in wild-type cells (Takagi et al.,
2013). These ﬁndings support the possibility that Sec16
has a regulatory role on the COPII coat assembly, likely
by inﬂuencing the GTPase activity of Sar1, which re-
cruits the outer COPII coat components (Takagi et al.,
2013). Increase in ERES size and number was veriﬁed
when ER export competent membrane cargo was
expressed transiently in tobacco leaf epidermal cells
compared with ER export incompetent membrane cargo
and bulk ﬂow cargo (Hanton et al., 2008), supporting
that the establishment and maintenance of ERESs are
responsive to the cell’s necessity to export membrane
and cargo from the ER. It will be interesting to test in the
future whether modulation of ERES number and size
depends on Sec16 and its functional interactions with
COPII proteins.
A striking feature of the ERESs is their movement. The
subcellular distribution of ERESs with respect to Golgi
stacks has been debated for quite some time (Brandizzi
and Barlowe, 2013). Although a transient association of
the COPII machinery with the Golgi apparatus is plau-
sible if partially coated COPII carriers are linked with the
Golgi membrane before the COPII coat is completely
shed (Langhans et al., 2012), a recent study on the sub-
cellular localization and function of a plant Sec16 ho-
molog has revealed new insights that further support an
association of ERESs and motile Golgi (daSilva et al.,
2004; Takagi et al., 2013). In particular, through ﬂuo-
rescence recovery after photobleaching analyses using a
functional ﬂuorescent protein to Sec16A, Sec16A was
found to undergo dynamic binding and release from the
membranes to slower rates compared with those of the
outer COPII coat components such as Sec13, which was
found to interact with Sec16 together with Sec31, and
Sec24 (Takagi et al., 2013). If the punctate distribution of
ﬂuorescent protein fusion to COPII components ob-
served in live-cell imaging studies were the result of
association of these proteins with Golgi membranes,
then Sec16 should show dynamics on and off mem-
branes similar to the outer COPII components. How-
ever, the evidence that Sec16 cycles on and off the
membranes at a slower rate compared with Sec24 and
Sec13 and that the pool of membrane-associated protein
signiﬁcantly differs between Sec16 and Sec13 or Sec24
(Takagi et al., 2013) supports that a subpopulation of
Sec16 is excluded from the coat of formed COPII carriers
and labels ERESs that face the Golgi apparatus. The
discrete steady-state localization of Sec16A at ERESs that
are associated with the Golgi stacks supports that the
plant ER/Golgi interface is uniquely organized such that
ERESs move together with associated Golgi stacks. In
this model, known as the secretory-units model (daSilva
et al., 2004), ERESs would facilitate ER export to the
Golgi at a Golgi-facing surface that is relatively static.
Such organization does not exclude the possibility that
non-Golgi-associated ERESs may also exist. In this light,
it is possible that the ERES/Golgi unit may encounter
ERESs that are not associated with a Golgi stack and
eventually associate with it. It is similarly possible that
non-Golgi-associated ERESs may assemble to form new
Golgi stacks. The association of ERESs with the Golgi
could also favor efﬁcient retrograde transport mediated
by cargo carriers such as COPI vesicles that have
been clearly visualized in plant cells (Pimpl et al., 2000;
Donohoe et al., 2007). ADP-ribosylation factor1, the
GTPase involved in COPI coat assembly and dissocia-
tion, as well as coatomer, has been localized at the plant
Golgi (Stefano et al., 2006; Matheson et al., 2007). It
is possible to hypothesize that COPI vesicles might
fuse proximally to COPII-enriched ERESs. Retrograde
transport of membrane from the Golgi at the ER-Golgi
interface close to the ERES region could facilitate fast
retrieval and concentration of soluble N-ethylmaleimide-
sensitive factor activating protein receptor (SNARE)
proteins and other components of the machinery neces-
sary for anterograde transport from the ER towards the
Golgi.
The close spatial relationship between Golgi and ER
and the evidence for a continuous exchange of Golgi
enzymes with the ER (Brandizzi et al., 2002b) raise the
question on whether the close association of ERESs with
Golgi could have a role in holding the ER and the Golgi
in close association. Such organization would facilitate
ER protein export to a motile organelle. That the plant
ER and the Golgi are attached has been demonstrated
through the application of optical laser tweezers
through which induced movement of tweezer-pulled
Golgi stacks caused movement of the ER (Sparkes
et al., 2009a). It is possible that ERESs and Golgi may be
tethered by a proteinaceous mesh, which could not only
facilitate the ER-Golgi directionality of COPII carriers,
but also hold the two organelles together. It may also be
that ERESs have a more direct role in the ER-Golgi in-
teraction. It is also possible that the transient state be-
tween formation and dissipation of COPII carriers
could enable the formation of a dynamic bridge that is
sufﬁcient to hold the Golgi in place on ERESs. Similar to
the Golgi biogenesis model proposed earlier (Donohoe
et al., 2013), the dynamic attachment of the ER and the
Golgi would be facilitated during cisternae biogenesis
whereby the most ER-proximal cisterna of the Golgi
would be produced de novo by partial or complete
fusion of COPII carriers and then mature into a distal
396
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.

cisterna via retrograde recycling of membranes and
proteins.
CHRIS HAWES: LET IT BE TUBES
What Can EM Tell Us?
Back in the 1970s and 1980s, prior to the discovery of
COPI and COII vesicles, various electron microscope
(EM) studies of the plant endomembrane system sug-
gested that there may be direct membrane connections
between the ER and Golgi bodies, which were often
termed dicytosomes in those days (Mollenhauer at al.,
1976; Harris, 1979). To enable selective enhancement of
the membranes of these organelles and to permit studies
in three dimensions using thick sections and high-
voltage electron microscopy, osmium impregnation
techniques combined with either zinc iodide or potas-
sium ferricyanide, to enhance the deposition of osmium
on membranes and within the lumen of EM tubules and
ER/Golgi cisternae, were often applied (Harris, 1979;
Hepler, 1981). This resulted in a number of reports
suggesting that the ER was directly connected to Golgi
bodies via membrane-bounded tubules and that Golgi
bodies themselves presented many tubules at the mar-
gins of their cisternae.
In our laboratory, we undertook a limited survey of
ER-Golgi interactions in a number of tissues using the
zinc iodide osmium impregnation technique (Juniper
et al., 1982) and concluded that in maize (Zea mays) root
caps, bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) root tips, and leaves
(probably erroneously), the ER and Golgi were not
connected. However, in the heavily protein-secreting
glands of the Venus ﬂytrap (Dionea muscipula), after
stimulation of secretion, we observed numerous tubular
extensions from cisternal rims, including cis-cisternae,
that appeared to interconnect with the ER. At the same
time, a study of the Golgi apparatus in developing
wheat (Triticum aestivum) endosperm (Parker and
Hawes, 1982), using high-voltage electron micros-
copy of thick sections of osmium-impregnated
tissue, reported ﬁne peripheral cisternal tubules
connecting the cis-Golgi as well as other cisternae to
the ER. This was also reported in developing bean
and mung bean (Vigna radiata) seeds (Harris, 1979;
Harris and Oparka, 1983). In wheat, these ﬁne tu-
bules were often much thinner than an ER tubule
and, unless heavily osmium impregnated, under
normal contrasting conditions in the EM, would
unlikely scatter sufﬁcient electrons to be readily
visible. More recently, we reported ER-Golgi con-
nections in tobacco leaves using osmium impregna-
tion (Brandizzi et al., 2002b). Of course, the presence
of tubules in electron micrographs does not prove
they are involved in transport, retrograde, or anter-
ograde but does show perhaps a more intimate re-
lationship between the two organelles than is often
assumed. Likewise, it has been shown that the ER
surface itself is highly motile (Runions et al., 2006).
Therefore, conceptually, there should be no problem
in envisaging membrane ﬂow from the ER through
to the Golgi.
In contrast to these results, there are relatively few
reports of vesicles budding from the ER or existing at
the interface between the ER and Golgi, although
Schnepf and Christ (1980) suggested that a vesicle ﬂow
exits in the epithelial cells of the nectaries of Asclepias
curassavica. Only in a few publications using ultra-rapid
high-pressure freeze ﬁxation followed by freeze sub-
stitution and electron tomography have COPII vesicles
been shown budding from the ER (Kang and Staehelin,
2008; Hawes, 2012; Donohoe et al., 2013), mainly in root
meristem cells. An example in developing Arabidopsis
endosperm tissue can be seen in Figure 1, C to G, of this
article. Unfortunately, three-dimensional analysis and
reconstruction by electron tomography of data such as
these still relies on manual tracing of images, as auto-
segmentation algorithms cannot as yet differentiate the
subtle differences in contrast in such electron micro-
graphs to permit totally unbiased autosegmented re-
constructions. However, it is possible to observe tubular
connections between ER and cis-Golgi in tomograms of
osmium-impregnated root material (C. Hawes, unpub-
lished data; Fig. 3A). At this stage, it should be noted
that lack of COPII vesicles is not restricted to plants but
has been reported in several microorganisms. Likewise,
depletion of COPII components does not always inhibit
cargo transport from the ER in yeasts and animals (for
references, see Mironov, 2014).
An argument has been made on the lack of COPII EM
images based around the calculation that, in reality,
there are very few COPII vesicles at any one time in the
ER-Golgi interface and that, in any one thin section, at
most, only one vesicle would be seen (Langhans et al.,
2012). This argument of course only holds true if such
vesicles do exist. If they don’t, then they obviously
would not be seen. Likewise, if tubules are transient in
nature, they would rarely be seen in conventional
electron micrographs and, when caught in cross section,
would appear to be vesicular! An obvious experiment
where COPII vesicles should be seen is in the refor-
mation of Golgi after brefeldin A (BFA)-induced reab-
sorption into the ER. One such study on tobacco Bright
Yellow2 (BY2) cells reported buds on the ER surfaces,
which were infrequent, and tubular vesicular clusters,
representing the earliest observable stage of stack re-
generation cells (Langhans et al., 2007). These clusters
immunolabeled for COPI coat components but not for
COPII proteins. Considering the number of Golgi stacks
in such cells, which is in the hundreds, if COPII vesicles
exist, then it is surprising that none were seen in these
experiments.
Of course, the get-out-of-jail card and perhaps a lazy
answer to all of these discrepancies in the ultrastructural
literature is simply to state that data from chemically
ﬁxed material is artifactual in nature due to slow ﬁxation
rates and only data from ultra-rapidly frozen freeze-
substituted material is acceptable. This of course ignores
the fact that, in chemically ﬁxed material, it is easy to
visualize both COPI and clathrin coats. So, why not
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
397
Vesicles or Tubes

COPII coats, especially as they are relatively easy to vi-
sualize in chemically ﬁxed cells of algae such as C. noc-
tigama (Hummel et al., 2007)? Two other golden rules of
thin-section transmission electron microscopy also have
to be remembered: (1) A thin section presents a two-
dimensional image, and thus a tubule in cross section
can easily be misinterpreted as a vesicle; and (2) Any
biological material has to scatter sufﬁcient electrons to
form an image. Thus, a membrane in transverse section,
spanning 70 nm of resin, scatters sufﬁcient electrons to
form a classic unit-membrane image, whereas the same
stained membrane in face view may not present sufﬁ-
cient heavy-metal stain molecules and thus be electron
lucent and not form an image; thus, ﬁne tubules and
membranes in face view can be missed. Selective-
membrane staining techniques overcome this latter
limitation. Of course, other EM techniques exist such
as freeze-fracture or freeze-fracture deep etch, which
should reveal structured exit sites on ER and COPII
coats, but as far as I am aware, apart from the occasional
image showing clathrin-coated vesicles and COPI vesi-
cles (Coleman et al., 1987; Andreeva et al., 1998, no such
images of COPII structures have been published in
plants.
Has Live-Cell Imaging Helped?
Our initial observations on Golgi and ER in living leaf
epidermal cells let us observe, for the ﬁrst time, the
dynamic nature of the organelles and the fact that Golgi
bodies in leaves appeared to move over the surface of
the ER (Boevink et al., 1998). This led us to propose the
hoover model of Golgi bodies traveling over the ER
surface sucking up vesicles produced by the ER, thus
making the serious, but all too common, mistake of
assuming that the plant ER-Golgi interface would
function exactly the same as the mammalian ER in the
production of COPII vesicles. However, over the past
decade or so, we have reﬁned our ideas and developed
the secretory unit concept of ERESs and Golgi bodies
traveling as single units around the cell with the motile
surface of the ER (daSilva et al., 2004; Langhans et al.,
2012). Such advances were made possible by the revo-
lution in live-cell imaging offered by ﬂuorescent protein
Figure 3. A, Maximum-intensity projection in neg-
ative contrast of a stack of thin sections from a to-
mogram of a pea (Pisum sativum) root tip Golgi
body and associated ER impregnated by the osmium
zinc iodide technique. The reconstruction is pre-
sented at an angle to show a clear tubular connec-
tion between the ER and cis-Golgi. B, Inside face
view of a dry-cleaved carrot (Daucus carota) sus-
pension culture cell. The cell had been ﬁxed on a
coated EM grid, dehydrated, and critical point dried
prior to dry cleaving on double-sided tape. The view
onto the plasma membrane shows dark mitochon-
dria (M), complete Golgi stacks in face view (G),
cisternal ER (CER), and tubular ER (arrows). Note the
huge difference between the diameter of a Golgi
body and ER tubules.
398
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.

technology and direct organelle labeling combined with
techniques such as photobleaching and photoactivation
of ﬂuorescent probes. This enabled a range of experi-
ments to be undertaken on the ER-Golgi interface, and
contrary to what is often stated, it was shown there is no
real evidence that transport between the ER and indi-
vidual Golgi bodies only takes places when stacks are
stationary (the stop-and-go model; Brandizzi et al.,
2002b). We demonstrated that in a ﬂuorescence recovery
after photobleaching experiment, recovery of ﬂuores-
cence of a Golgi membrane protein could be demon-
strated in moving Golgi, indicating a continual transfer
of protein from ER to Golgi (daSilva et al., 2004). Sub-
sequently, laser manipulation of Golgi has demon-
strated that when captured and translated through the
cytoplasm by an infrared laser beam, Golgi bodies al-
most always drag a tubule of ER behind them (Sparkes
et al., 2009c). One of the conclusions from this work was
that the ER and Golgi are closely associated and tethered
together, not via the cytoskeleton, but most likely by a
number of structural proteins such as the Golgins/Golgi
matrix proteins (Hawes et al., 2008). In studies of Golgi
destruction and reformation in tobacco leaf cells, we
showed that with either a genetic block of secretion or
inhibition by BFA, reabsorption of the Golgi back into
the ER was an ordered process, starting with the release
of translocated Golgins into the cytoplasm followed
by sequential reabsorption of trans-, medial, and cis-
membranes into the ER. However, a cis-located matrix
component, CASP, remained associated with ERESs,
and we suggest that this protein may be part of the teth-
ering complex holding the Golgi to the ER (Osterrieder
et al., 2010; Schoberer et al., 2010). How this ordered
membrane transport back to the ER is mediated is not
known; perhaps some of the cisternal associated Golgi-ER
tubules are involved in this pathway.
Interestingly, Golgi bodies in vacuolated tissue such as
leaf epidermal cells are only ever associated with curved
membranes of the ER such as tubules or more rarely the
edges of cisternae (Sparkes et al., 2009b) and are never
seen on the ﬂat faces of ER cisternae. This situation has
also been reported for yeast, where ERESs were associ-
ated with high-curvature domains containing the
membrane-curving ER protein reticulon1 (Okamoto
et al., 2012), and we have preliminary evidence that in
Arabidopsis, reticulons may interact with SEC12, the
Sar1-guanine nucleotide exchange factor that recruits the
GTPase to the ER membrane as part of the COPII coat-
building process (Kriechbaumer and Hawes, unpublished
data). Thus, we can conclude that plant ERESprobably
requires a curved ER surface on which to form.
Due to the nature of ﬂuorescence and the diffraction
limit of the microscopies used, an artiﬁcial impression is
given in typical confocal micrographs of the diameter of
ER tubules, compared with the diameter of a Golgi body
(around 1 mm), giving a ratio of approximately 1:2.
However, when observed by EM techniques such as dry
cleave to show the cortical ER, whose tubes are in reality
are around 30 to 90 nm, and associated Golgi, it is ob-
vious that this ratio is more like 1:8, even taking into
account the fact that cis-Golgi cisternae tend to be smaller
in diameter than the rest of the stack (Fig. 3B). Thus,
ERESs have to form on a relatively restricted area of
highly curved membrane and not a ﬂat surface, and
perhaps the requirement for membrane bending proteins
to produce a bud is lessened. Also, an ERES would need
to be linear in structure along roughly 200 nm of ER
tubule. Could such a structure produce sufﬁcient 70-nm
vesicles to transfer the required protein and membrane to
a Golgi body? Such calculations have not yet been made.
Of course, it is generally accepted that COPII compo-
nents are required in plants for some, if not all, transport
between the ER and Golgi. As described above, it is easily
demonstrated that inhibition of the formation of a COPII
coat by expressing a nonhydrolysable form of the coat-
initiating GTPase SAR1p results in the disruption of Golgi
stack homeostasis and resorption of Golgi membrane
back into the ER (Osterrieder et al., 2010). However,
coating of a membrane patch to promote curvature and
concentrate cargo at the tip of a transiently produced
tubule is a distinct possibility. It has been shown in vitro
that COPII components can tubulate liposome membrane
(Bacia et al., 2011), and it has even been suggested that
COPII coat components have sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to form
300-nm tubular structures that can accommodate large
ﬁlamentous cargo such as procollagen ﬁbrils (Miller and
Schekman, 2013). Such tubes could easily span the nar-
row greater-than-300-nm interface between ER and cis-
Golgi in plants.
DAVID G. ROBINSON: THE ODDS ARE STACKED IN
FAVOR OF VESICLES
The Mobile Secretory Unit: What Are the Consequences
for Bidirectional ER-Golgi Trafﬁc?
In the frequently used leaf epidermal system, it is well
established that COPII-ﬂuorescence labeling always
colocalizes with ﬂuorescent Golgi markers, whether the
Golgi stacks are mobile or not (daSilva et al., 2004;
Hanton et al., 2009). For most researchers, punctate
ﬂuorescent COPII signals on the surface of the ER are
synonymous with ERESs, but this may not necessarily be
so because the visualization of COPII binding does not
actually reveal the actual exit event. Langhans et al.
(2012) have also questioned the ﬁdelity of COPII-
ﬂuorescence labeling in recording ERESs on the surface
of the ER and have suggested instead that the signals
may instead represent prefusion COPII vesicles lying in
the interface between ERESs and the cis-Golgi. Despite
these caveats, it seems that anterograde trafﬁc from the
ER is restricted to a domain of the ER immediately ad-
jacent to a Golgi stack and is embodied in the concept of
the secretory unit (daSilva et al., 2004; Hanton et al.,
2009). It now appears that retrograde trafﬁc between the
Golgi and the ER is also spatially restricted, because
it has been demonstrated that the SNAREs on target
membrane (t-SNAREs) required for COPI vesicle fusion
with the ER localize to ER domains immediately un-
derneath Golgi stacks (Lerich et al. 2012). This unique
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
399
Vesicles or Tubes

feature of the secretory pathway in plants probably
serves the purpose of control and regulation, because
the problem of stochastic release of COPII vesicles into
the cytosol and their subsequent capture by Golgi stacks
is avoided.
The concept of the secretory unit received great sup-
port from laser-trapping technology, which demon-
strated that ER tubules moved with individual Golgi
stacks when the latter were displaced (Sparkes et al.,
2009a). This key observation could be interpreted as
proof of direct membrane continuities between the ER
and the cis-Golgi, but in the opinion of the majority, it is
a consequence of the existence of tethering/matrix pro-
teins that not only anchor the Golgi stack to the ER
surface (Latijnhouwers et al., 2005; Osterrieder, 2012),
but also maintain the integrity of the Golgi stack (Ito
et al., 2014). An important feature of these experiments is
that the Golgi stacks were immobilized by actin inhibi-
tors, obviously a prerequisite for capturing otherwise
mobile Golgi stacks. In this situation, interlocking matrix
protein interactions between the ER and the Golgi are
probably comparable to the real-life situation of a stop
period in Golgi travel. However, it remains unclear as to
whether the actual exit of anterograde cargo from the ER
(i.e. vesicle budding [or COPII tube formation]) is re-
stricted to the stationary phase or occurs continuously
during Golgi movement. We also do not know whether
antero- and retrograde transport are separate or coor-
dinated, synchronized events. Lerich et al. (2012) have
suggested that prefusion clusters of COPII and COPI
vesicles might accompany mobile Golgi stacks, but the
colocalization of Golgi stacks with the SNARE of the Qc-
type syntaxin of plants72 (SYP72) of the t-SNARE fusion
complex only in the immobilized condition suggests that
entry of COPI retrograde cargo into the ER is restricted
to stationary Golgi stacks.
Why Are COPII Vesicles Difﬁcult to Visualize in
Higher Plants?
COPI vesicles have been detected at the periphery of
Golgi cisternae in higher plants (Pimpl et al., 2000;
Donohoe et al., 2007). Although their positive identiﬁ-
cation as retrograde carriers to the ER in plants awaits
conﬁrmation, it is very likely that they do fulﬁll this
function. This being so, there seems to be no a priori
reason for questioning the participation of COPII vesi-
cles in anterograde ER-Golgi trafﬁc, yet their visu-
alization in higher plant cells has proved difﬁcult. In
mammalian cells, there is a transport intermediate be-
tween the ER and the perinuclear immobile Golgi
complex known as the ER-Golgi intermediate compart-
ment (ERGIC; Appenzeller-Herzog and Hauri, 2006). It
is this structure rather than the Golgi apparatus that is
engaged in bidirectional COPII/COPI-mediated traf-
ﬁcking. During its formation (apparently through ho-
motypic COPII vesicle fusion) and before it begins
moving in the direction of the Golgi complex, it lies close
to the surface of the ER (200–500 nm distant) in the
immediate vicinity of ER export sites. Nevertheless, free
COPII-coated carriers/vesicles have been reported on
several occasions in the ER/ERGIC interface (Zeuschner
et al., 2006; Hughes et al., 2009; Witte et al., 2011). In
support of these observations, it has been recently
demonstrated that loss of function of a cytosolic protein
complex (transmembrane tyrosine receptor kinase-fused
gene), which forms aggregates that temporarily trap
COPII carriers in the ER/ERGIC interface, causes free
COPII carriers to accumulate throughout the cytoplasm
(Johnson et al., 2015).
A similarly narrow interface exists between ER and
the cis-Golgi (the probable ERGIC equivalent in plants),
so why the problem in seeing COPII vesicles in thin
sections of higher plant cells? Langhans et al. (2012) have
attributed this to the relatively small numbers of trans-
port vesicles (at the very most 20) in the interface at any
one time, which extrapolates to only a single vesicle in a
thin section. There may be other contributing factors, for
example, the speed of vesicle transport and, obviously if
bidirectional transport is restricted to the stationary
phase of Golgi movement, the timing of transport. If so,
the chances of visualizing transport vesicles in the ER-
Golgi interface will be seriously affected by the mobile
status of the Golgi stack at the moment of ﬁxation.
Have Gap-Spanning Tubules Been Observed in the
Interface between the ER and cis-Golgi?
This can be answered with a categorical no, despite
opposing claims made in some recent reviews (Sparkes
et al., 2009a; Stefano et al., 2014). A careful scrutiny of the
electron micrographs in the papers cited in these reviews
(for details, see “Chris Hawes: Let It Be Tubes”) in sup-
port of direct membrane continuity at the ER/Golgi in-
terface reveals that the connections are not at the interface
but are, in fact, lateral connections between undeﬁned but
probably median Golgi cisternae and the ER. Moreover,
the frequency of such continuities is enhanced under
nonphysiological conditions, e.g. cold (Mollenhauer at al.,
1976) or BFA (Ritzenthaler et al., 2002) treatments. The
physiological signiﬁcance of such lateral connections re-
mains obscure, especially because it is not in harmony
with the glycoprotein processing reactions that are sup-
posed to occur in a sequential manner through the Golgi
stack (from cis to trans). Also, lateral connections of this
type are difﬁcult to reconcile with Golgi stacks gliding
over the surface of the ER. Finally, if tubular connections
between the ER/nuclear envelope and the cis-face of a
Golgi stack do exist, one would expect that the chances of
visualizing them would be greater in those cases where
the Golgi is immobile. However, such structures have
never been seen in algal cells with naturally stationary
Golgi stacks nor in higher plant cells where the Golgi has
been immobilized through actin inhibitors.
What Are the Advantages of Vesicles?
Vesicles allow organelles to communicate among
themselves and with the cell exterior (via the plasma
400
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.

membrane). With such transport vectors, cargo mole-
cules can be transferred between organelles without
disturbing their integrity. By excluding certain mole-
cules and including others, vesicles also allow for a high
degree of selectivity in intracellular transport. The efﬁ-
cient sorting of proteins into vesicles is to a great extent
related to coat proteins at their surface that interact with
several different types of integral transmembrane pro-
teins: cargo receptors, helper proteins, such as the p24
proteins, and SNAREs. All of the coat proteins (COPI,
COPII, and clathrin) can polymerize to form spherical
structures (cages) and thus have the inherent ability to
form vesicles, although it is true that COPII does it dif-
ferently to COPI and clathrin (Hughson, 2010). How-
ever, the special properties of the COPII coat allow the
incorporation of cargos of different sizes, something that
cannot be achieved with clathrin or COPI vesicles.
Therefore, COPII vesicles of different sizes can accom-
modate export of different cargo from the ER (Miller and
Schekman, 2013) without the need for direct tubular
connections. Finally, by concentrating SNAREs into a
small amount of membrane, the efﬁciency of vesicle
fusion with a speciﬁc target compartment is increased.
The inhibition of vesicle formation can lead to uncon-
trolled fusion of organelles mediated by SNAREs on
vesicle membrane and t-SNAREs as seen for the Golgi-
ER hybrid structures formed in the presence of BFA
(Elazar et al., 1994; Ritzenthaler et al., 2002).
By contrast, tubular contacts (irrespective of their
longevity), or direct contacts between organelles culmi-
nating in fusion and then ﬁssion (as, for example, in
hug-and-kiss models; Kurokawa et al., 2014), have the
inherent caveat that an unspeciﬁc mixing of organelle
contents may occur. Another problem is that if there is
direct contact between the lumina of two adjacent com-
partments, how can pH differences be maintained? This
is particularly important in the case of the endoplasmic
reticulum protein retention (ERD2) receptor recognizing
the tetrapeptide motif lys-asp-glu-leu (KDEL) receptor,
which, in mammalian cells, is thought to bind to its
KDEL-ligands at an acid pH (pH 6.7) in the cis-Golgi and
to release them at the higher pH (pH 7.2) of the ER lu-
men (Wilson et al., 1993; Majoul et al., 1998; Paroutis
et al., 2004). As is the case with the mannosyl-6 P
receptor in mammalian endosomes, apparently only a
relatively small shift in pH is sufﬁcient to cause ligand
release. A similar pH gradient of about 0.5 pH units
between the ER and the Golgi also exists in plants
(Martiniére et al., 2013), and it has recently been shown
that the binding of COPII proteins to a plant ERD2 ho-
molog is favored at neutral pH conditions, whereas the
recruitment of COPI proteins to ERD2 is more optimal at
an acidic pH (Montezinos et al., 2014).
Bidirectional protein trafﬁcking between the ER and
the Golgi apparatus also entails the movement of
membrane. In the anterograde direction, this serves the
purpose of replenishing membrane lost at the trans-face
of the Golgi stack through release of the trans-Golgi
network (Viotti et al., 2010) and continually drives the
process termed cisternal maturation. In the retrograde
direction, it is a consequence of receptor recycling.
While vesicles clearly fulﬁll this requirement, it is less
easy to see how tubes can achieve it. If ERES and cis-
Golgi cisternae brieﬂy touch each other, fuse, and rapidly
separate, there can be no net movement of membrane at
all. This is a stringent interpretation of the hug-and-kiss
model of Kurokawa et al. (2014). However, if there is an
active uptake of membrane (a patch of previously
COPII-coated ERESs) together with soluble cargo as the
cis-Golgi docks onto ERES, the model should perhaps be
renamed hug and bite.
As new data becomes available, researchers are often
compelled to revise their standpoints on particular issues.
My initial interpretation of ER-Golgi trafﬁc, based on
immunoﬂuorescent studies in tobacco BY2 cells (Yang
et al., 2005), led me to believe that ERESs were greatly
in excess of Golgi stacks. Switching to leaf epidermal
cells and perhaps more stringent localization criteria via
transient expression of X-ﬂuorescent protein tagged,
convinced me of the validity of the secretory unit concept.
Nevertheless, I was never in doubt about vesicles, and I
maintain that the unique features of the secretory unit, i.e.
mobile Golgi stacks with a narrow interface to the ER, are
not necessarily an impediment to COP vesicles as medi-
ators for bidirectional protein trafﬁc between the ER and
the Golgi apparatus in higher plants. By contrast, direct
membrane continuities between the ER and the Golgi
have physiological drawbacks, and there is no convincing
evidence for their existence, even in organisms where
Golgi stacks remain permanently stationary.
AKIHIKO NAKANO: A COMMON MECHANISM
FOR ER-TO-GOLGI TRAFFIC: A VIEW FROM
SUPERRESOLUTION LIVE-IMAGING MICROSCOPY
How proteins trafﬁc between the ER and the Golgi
apparatus is an interesting and controversial issue.
Problems have arisen in part through limitations of time
and space resolution in observing the two organelles.
My opinions section will focus on how we have tackled
this problem by superresolution live imaging.
The budding yeast S. cerevisiae has been used as an
ideal model system to study molecular mechanisms of
membrane trafﬁcking, because it is amenable to both
genetics and biochemistry. In addition, its simplicity in
organellar organization offers advantages in live imag-
ing. We have applied high-speed confocal microscopy
(Nakano, 2002) to S. cerevisiae and have made many
discoveries that would have never been possible with-
out live imaging at high spatiotemporal resolutions.
Here, I will describe ﬁrst what we learned from S. cerevisiae
and then move on to compare similarly obtained data
from plant and animal cells.
Golgi cisternae do not stack in S. cerevisiae (Glick and
Nakano, 2009; Suda and Nakano, 2012), but not all
budding yeasts have this feature. P. pastoris has, for
example, stacked Golgi. This peculiar property of
S. cerevisiae provides a wonderful opportunity to ob-
serve individual Golgi cisternae in living cells. Our and
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
401
Vesicles or Tubes

Ben Glick’s groups demonstrated that the yeast Golgi
cisternae change properties from cis to medial and then
to trans over time (Losev et al., 2006; Matsuura-Tokita
et al., 2006). This gave strong support for the cisternal
maturation model of intra-Golgi protein transport (Glick
and Nakano, 2009; Nakano and Luini, 2010).
During the course of our studies on S. cerevisiae, we
found that the microscopic method we were using
(combination of a high-speed spinning-disc confocal
scanner and a high-sensitivity camera system) had a
great potential in improving resolution not only in time,
but also in space (Matsuura-Tokita et al., 2006). I will
skip the details here, but brieﬂy, accurate image ac-
quisition and minute data processing by deconvolution
allow for amazing superresolution beyond the diffrac-
tion limit (Kurokawa et al., 2013). We have achieved 50-
to 60-nm resolution in three-dimensional space with the
time resolution of a few seconds per volume (the spec is
further rising now). This method has been given the
acronym SCLIM, standing for superresolution confocal
live imaging microscopy (Kurokawa et al., 2013).
With such a high spatiotemporal resolution, we next
tried to understand how cis-Golgi cisternae form.
According to a classic cisternal maturation model,
newly formed COPII vesicles containing cargo fuse with
each other, and cis-Golgi proteins would join via COPI
vesicles. First, we observed that the ﬂuorescence of
COPII coats, indicators of ERESs, shows a very dynamic
behavior. The ERESs enlarge and shrink and are often
very mobile. They appear to be stabilized when
approaching high-curvature ER domains, such as the
saddle-shaped surface of the ER sheet edge and along
the ER tubules (Fig. 4). On the Golgi side, cis-cisternae
show a signiﬁcantly high probability of staying in the
vicinity of the ERESs, whereas trans-cisternae do not
(Okamoto et al., 2012).
A more detailed analysis of their behavior unveiled
that the cis-Golgi frequently approaches the ERESs,
keeps contact for a few seconds, and then leaves there. In
addition, the ﬂuorescence intensity of COPII often goes
down upon this contact, suggesting an uncoating event
during this process. The trans-Golgi cisternae also ap-
proach the ERESs but do not share the same tendency
for a collapse of the COPII coat (Kurokawa et al., 2014).
We reasoned that what we later termed the hug-and-kiss
behavior of the cis-Golgi toward the ERESs indicates the
capture of newly forming COPII vesicles followed by
their uncoating and subsequent fusion with the cis-
Golgi. To conﬁrm this, we set up a system to pulse
chase the cargo by live imaging. Fluorescent cargo that is
synthesized and accumulated in the ER at a high tem-
perature (39°C) proceeds to the secretory process upon
shift down to a low temperature (25°C). Cargo ﬁrst re-
locates to the ERESs and then gradually moves to the
Golgi apparatus. When cis-Golgi approaches the ER, the
cargo signal overlaps with the cis-Golgi signal, and then
the cis-Golgi leaves the ER together with the cargo
(Kurokawa et al., 2014). Thus, we conclude that cargo is
delivered from the ERESs to the cis-Golgi through such a
hug-and-kiss event. This seems to be a safer and more
efﬁcient way to send cargo to the destination than by
releasing free COPII vesicles into the cytosol. It also ex-
plains why it has been so difﬁcult to observe COPII
vesicles by electron microscopy. Now, this hug-and-kiss
delivery of cargo from the ER to the Golgi raises many
new questions. (1) Do the COPII signals seen in our
experiments represent clusters of COPII vesicles or
patches of COPII coat? We do not know at the moment.
Their sizes and shapes vary dynamically, suggesting
that they do not correspond to individual single COPII
buds. Considering the ﬂexible nature of the COPII coat
(Miller and Schekman, 2013), they could be either clus-
ters of COPII buds or large patches of COPII coat, as has
been proposed for clathrin coats. (2) Is the COPII vesicle
formation completed before or during the hug and kiss?
In other words, when does the ﬁssion of COPII vesicles
occur? This is a good question. As the sorting of cargo
from ER resident proteins must occur during the bud-
ding event, discontinuity would be desired. But as has
been discussed for the presence of tubular connections in
the Golgi stacks (Glick and Nakano, 2009; Nakano and
Luini, 2010), a physical discontinuity of membrane may
not be necessarily required for sorting of proteins. (3) If
the hug-and-kiss mechanism ensures efﬁcient and safe
transfer of cargo, why are COPII vesicles necessary? We
are not proposing that COPII vesicles are not released at
all. At least, in certain in vitro or cell-free reconstructed
systems, COPII vesicles do form in a Sar1 GTPase-
dependent manner (Oka and Nakano, 1994; Barlowe
et al., 1994; Matsuoka et al., 1998; Sato and Nakano,
Figure 4. Organization of the ERESs in the bud-
ding yeast S. cerevisiae. Left, Dual-color three-
dimensional image of Sec13-GFP (ERES marker, green)
and monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein-Sec12 (bulk
ER marker, red) obtained by SCLIM. Right, Two-
dimensional slice image taken from the three-
dimensional data. ERESs localize at the high-curvature
domains of the ER, such as along tubules and at the
edge of the sheet. Bar = 1 mm.
402
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.

2004; Tabata et al., 2009). In sec17 (soluble NSF attach-
ment protein) and sec18 (N-ethylmaleimide sensitive
factor) mutants, which are defective in vesicle fusion,
numerous vesicles including COPII vesicles accumulate
in the cytosol (Novick et al., 1980). However, releasing
free vesicles in a large amount would be wasteful and
even dangerous. Under normal conditions, we believe
that complete release of COPII vesicles is maintained to a
minimum. (4) If the cis-Golgi acts as a preexisting com-
partment to capture cargo from the ER, is there a stable
pool? How does this model reconcile with the cisternal
maturation from cis to trans? In our previous work
(Matsuura-Tokita et al., 2006), we stated that the cis-Golgi
appears to form de novo. However, with improved res-
olution, it looks more likely that small structures con-
taining a cis-Golgi marker move around and grow over
time before entering the maturation phase. We usually
use Suppressor of Erd2 Deletion (Sed5; the counterpart of
SYP31/SYP32 of plants and syntaxin5 of mammals) as a
cis-Golgi marker, but considering the ﬁndings we have
made in tobacco BY2 cells (Ito et al., 2012), the yeast Sed5
compartment may represent both a sorting platform like
the ERGIC as well as the ﬁrst enzymatic station of the
glycosylation factory (see also below). (5) Is a hug-and-
kiss mechanism speciﬁc to yeast? This is also a frequently
asked question. We believe that the answer is no. In the
remaining part of my essay, I would like to proceed to a
comparison between yeast and other eukaryotes.
Plant cells have beautiful stacks of the Golgi appa-
ratus, which are largely associated with the ER. To
try to address how Golgi stacks are assembled and
maintained in tobacco BY2 cells, we set up a system for
live imaging in which Golgi stacks are disassembled
by BFA treatment and reformed after BFA removal (Ito
et al., 2012). While most of Golgi markers were absorbed
into the ER upon BFA treatment as previously reported
(Takeuchi et al., 2000, 2002; Ritzenthaler et al., 2002), we
realized that some of the cis-Golgi markers (SYP31 and
Retrieval Protein Endoplasmic Reticulum 1B) remained
in the cytosol as small punctate structures. Another cis-
Golgi marker, ERD2, diffuses into the ER together with
medial and trans-markers, suggesting that there are two
different classes of cis-Golgi proteins. Upon BFA wash,
the small punctate structures of SYP31 nucleate to build
new cisternae, to which other Golgi proteins then join in
a cis-to-trans sequence. The small punctate structures of
SYP31 are in the close vicinity of the ERESs but do not
completely overlap with them (Ito et al., 2012).
All of these observations suggest that the SYP31
compartment represents a scaffold to build the Golgi
stack around, like the ERGIC of mammalian cells. The
other type of cis-Golgi, in which ERD2 resides, may be a
little distal to the SYP31 compartment. Simultaneous
imaging of SYP31 and ERD2 shows their slightly dif-
ferent localizations in the stack (Y. Ito, unpublished
data). Distinction of the cis-most cisterna of the Golgi
from the later compartments in terms of function has
also been reported by electron tomography. The cis-
most cisterna is proposed to function as a protein-
sorting platform, whereas the later compartments are
involved in the biosynthetic activities of the Golgi
(Donohoe et al., 2013). Regarding the relationship with
the ERESs, it should also be mentioned that, in our study
of BY2 cells, the number of ERESs is larger than that of
cis-Golgi cisternae (Fig. 5). The ERESs without associ-
ated Golgi stacks are extremely mobile and may become
stable when they encounter the Golgi (Ito et al., 2012).
Consideration of the role the ERGIC plays for a
subset of cis-Golgi compartments leads to the notion
that it may be a very general feature of ER-to-Golgi
trafﬁcking (Ito et al., 2014; Kurokawa et al., 2014). It is
widely accepted that the ERGIC is a typical structure of
vertebrate cells, which have radial organization of mi-
crotubules, and receives cargo from the ERESs in the
cell periphery before transporting it to the Golgi ribbon
in the centrosomal region. Other organisms that do not
have such astral patterns of microtubules, e.g. inverte-
brates, plants, and fungi, are believed to lack the ER-
GIC. However, as discussed above, plant cells appear to
have a structure functionally related to the ERGIC.
Drosophila melanogaster cells, which have dispersed
Golgi, have also been reported to have an ERGIC-like
structure (Witte et al., 2011). Furthermore, even in the
yeast S. cerevisiae, we now propose that the mobile
Sed5 structures that show a hug-and-kiss action toward
ERESs may be regarded as ERGIC-like (Kurokawa
et al., 2014). The ERGIC of mammalian cells is closely
associated with the ERESs (Budnik and Stephens, 2009)
and so is the D. melanogaster ERGIC (Witte et al., 2011).
A SCLIM image of ERESs and cis-Golgi in a BY2 cell is
presented in Figure 5. Altogether, the currently avail-
able data envisage a common mechanism of cargo de-
livery in the spatially close relationship of ERESs and
Figure 5. The cis-Golgi cisternae (monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein-
SYP31, magenta) and ERESs (SEC13-yellow ﬂuorescent protein, green)
visualized in tobacco BY2 cells. Confocal images were captured by
SCLIM and reconstructed into three dimensions with deconvolution. A
typical trajectory image from a three-dimensional time-lapse movie is
shown. Almost all of the Golgi stacks were associated with bright spots
of ERESs. From the magniﬁed image (inset), we could observe the ERESs
surrounding the cis-Golgi making ring-shaped ﬂuorescent patterns.
Bars = 5 and 1 mm (inset).
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
403
Vesicles or Tubes

the ERGIC (or its counterpart). Such an association of
ERESs and the ERGIC is relatively stable in the cases
of mammals, D. melanogaster, plants, and the yeast
P. pastoris but is transient in S. cerevisiae. Interaction of
these two compartments must require special molecular
machinery, and we have proposed a role for the tether-
ing factor Vesicle Transport (YusoU is transport in Japa-
nese) factor; yeast counterpart of p115) in the association
of ERESs and the cis-Golgi. Interestingly, when the Uso1
function is compromised by a temperature-sensitive
mutation, the action of cis-Golgi is frozen during the
hug-and-kiss event (Kurokawa et al., 2014).
There are still many problems remaining. Obviously,
the observation of COPII vesicles in the spatiotemporal
resolution good enough to distinguish individual dy-
namics has urgent priority for us. There is biochemical
evidence that cargoes are selected during COPII vesicle
budding (Sato and Nakano, 2005) and ER-Golgi shut-
tling proteins are retrieved back from the Golgi to the
ER via COPI vesicles (Cosson et al., 1998; Sato et al.,
2001). These events also await a revisit by live imaging.
We are now in the process of developing the second-
generation SCLIM, which will provide us with far-better
images of what is going on in the narrow interface be-
tween the ER and the Golgi apparatus.
CONCLUSION
After having gone through the information and ar-
guments presented above, it will not come as a surprise
to the reader that the authors found themselves unable
to reach a consensus about the modality of membrane
trafﬁc between the ER and the Golgi apparatus in higher
plants. While there is no question that COPII proteins
are essential for this process, doubt continues as to
whether vesicles are the vectors of bidirectional trafﬁc
between the two organelles. It is clear that ﬂuorescence
microscopy, immunolabeling, and live cell imaging in
combination have revolutionized our conceptual un-
derstanding of the structure and functioning of the eu-
karyotic Golgi apparatus and its relationship with the
ER. However, the present superresolution ﬂuorescence
microscopic techniques such as structured illumination
microscopy, stimulated emission depletion microscopy,
and photoactivated localization microscopy are not
sufﬁcient to unequivocally identify discrete individual
COPII vesicles. On the other hand, new techniques such
as SCLIM are emerging that have the potential for even
higher superresolution not only in space, but also in
time and may well bring about a breakthrough in un-
derstanding what really is going on in living cells. Of
course, electron microscopy is still the most powerful
technique to solve the ﬁner structural details of the in-
terface between the ER and the Golgi whether in
chemically ﬁxed or frozen samples. Thus, perhaps a
combination of ultra-rapid freezing and freeze substi-
tution combined with selective membrane staining and
one of the new high-resolution three-dimensional scan-
ning electron microscopy technologies such as focussed
ion beam-scanning electron microscopy or serial block
face imaging might solve some of the mysteries of the
plant ER-Golgi interface and help settle the controversy
explored in this article. Unfortunately, irrespective of the
method of preparation and the type of imaging, the
downside with electron microscopy is that only single
Golgi stacks can be visualized, with the caveat that the
one being visualized might temporarily not be engaged
in trafﬁcking with the ER.
There is also an issue with the experimental systems
being used. Beautiful live-cell imaging data has been
obtained with the leaf epidermis system, but obviously
it will be interesting to explore other cell types. While it
seems that the situation in tobacco BY2 cells is not too
different from that of leaf epidermal cells, there are other
cell types such as in the meristem or in the endosperm
during cellularization whose secretion status is unclear
and where it is difﬁcult, especially by conventional live-
cell imaging, to recognize a close spatial relationship
between the ER and Golgi stacks, let alone being able to
say anything about Golgi motility due to the sheer
density of the cytoplasm. On the other hand, such cell
types, because of their relatively high cytoplasm/cell
volume ratio, freeze well and are therefore most suit-
able for electron microscopy studies. The reverse is true
for leaf epidermal cells, which are excellent objects for
live-cell imaging, but present an almost insurmountable
obstacle for ultra-rapid freezing. It remains to say that,
even with the ideal plant cell, to capture the complexity
of bidirectional ER-Golgi trafﬁc in plant cells, correlative
light and electron microscopy is necessary. Establishing
this technique for studies on plants is going to be a
major challenge for the future.
Received January 25, 2015; accepted April 16, 2015; published April 16, 2015.
LITERATURE CITED
Andreeva AV, Kutuzov MA, Evans DE, Hawes CR (1998) The structure
and function of the Golgi apparatus: a hundred years of questions. J Exp
Bot 49: 1281–1291
Appenzeller-Herzog C, Hauri HP (2006) The ER-Golgi intermediate com-
partment (ERGIC): in search of its identity and function. J Cell Sci 119:
2173–2183
Bacia K, Futai E, Prinz S, Meister A, Daum S, Glatte D, Briggs JA,
Schekman R (2011) Multibudded tubules formed by COPII on artiﬁcial
liposomes. Sci Rep 1: 17
Bar-Peled M, Raikhel NV (1997) Characterization of AtSEC12 and At-
SAR1: Proteins likely involved in endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
transport. Plant Physiol 114: 315–324
Barlowe C, Orci L, Yeung T, Hosobuchi M, Hamamoto S, Salama N,
Rexach MF, Ravazzola M, Amherdt M, Schekman R (1994) COPII: a
membrane coat formed by Sec proteins that drive vesicle budding from
the endoplasmic reticulum. Cell 77: 895–907
Barlowe CK, Miller EA (2013) Secretory protein biogenesis and trafﬁc in
the early secretory pathway. Genetics 193: 383–410
Boevink P, Oparka K, Santa Cruz S, Martin B, Betteridge A, Hawes C
(1998) Stacks on tracks: the plant Golgi apparatus trafﬁcs on an actin/ER
network. Plant J 15: 441–447
Brandizzi F, Barlowe C (2013) Organization of the ER-Golgi interface for
membrane trafﬁc control. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14: 382–392
Brandizzi F, Frangne N, Marc-Martin S, Hawes C, Neuhaus J-M, Paris N
(2002a) The destination for single-pass membrane proteins is inﬂuenced
markedly by the length of the hydrophobic domain. Plant Cell 14: 1077–
1092
404
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.

Brandizzi F, Snapp EL, Roberts AG, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Hawes C
(2002b) Membrane protein transport between the endoplasmic reticu-
lum and the Golgi in tobacco leaves is energy dependent but cytoskel-
eton independent: evidence from selective photobleaching. Plant Cell 14:
1293–1309
Budnik A, Stephens DJ (2009) ER exit sites: localization and control of
COPII vesicle formation. FEBS Lett 583: 3796–3803
Coleman J, Evans D, Hawes C, Horsley D, Cole L (1987) Structure and mo-
lecular organization of higher plant coated vesicles. J Cell Sci 88: 35–45
Cosson P, Lefkir Y, Démollière C, Letourneur F (1998) New COP1-binding
motifs involved in ER retrieval. EMBO J 17: 6863–6870
Crofts AJ, Leborgne-Castel N, Hillmer S, Robinson DG, Phillipson B,
Carlsson LE, Ashford DA, Denecke J (1999) Saturation of the endo-
plasmic reticulum retention machinery reveals anterograde bulk ﬂow.
Plant Cell 11: 2233–2248
daSilva LL, Snapp EL, Denecke J, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Hawes C,
Brandizzi F (2004) Endoplasmic reticulum export sites and Golgi bodies
behave as single mobile secretory units in plant cells. Plant Cell 16:
1753–1771
Donohoe BS, Kang BH, Gerl MJ, Gergely ZR, McMichael CM, Bednarek
SY, Staehelin LA (2013) Cis-Golgi cisternal assembly and biosynthetic
activation occur sequentially in plants and algae. Trafﬁc 14: 551–567
Donohoe BS, Kang BH, Staehelin LA (2007) Identiﬁcation and character-
ization of COPIa- and COPIb-type vesicle classes associated with plant
and algal Golgi. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 163–168
Elazar Z, Orci L, Ostermann J, Amherdt M, Tanigawa G, Rothman JE
(1994) ADP-ribosylation factor and coatomer couple fusion to vesicle
budding. J Cell Biol 124: 415–424
Faso C, Chen YN, Tamura K, Held M, Zemelis S, Marti L, Saravanan R,
Hummel E, Kung L, Miller E, et al (2009) A missense mutation in the
Arabidopsis COPII coat protein Sec24A induces the formation of clusters
of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. Plant Cell 21: 3655–
3671
Glick BS, Nakano A (2009) Membrane trafﬁc within the Golgi apparatus.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25: 113–132
Hanton SL, Chatre L, Matheson LA, Rossi M, Held MA, Brandizzi F
(2008) Plant Sar1 isoforms with near-identical protein sequences exhibit
different localisations and effects on secretion. Plant Mol Biol 67: 283–
294
Hanton SL, Chatre L, Renna L, Matheson LA, Brandizzi F (2007) De novo
formation of plant endoplasmic reticulum export sites is membrane
cargo induced and signal mediated. Plant Physiol 143: 1640–1650
Hanton SL, Matheson LA, Chatre L, Brandizzi F (2009) Dynamic organi-
zation of COPII coat proteins at endoplasmic reticulum export sites in
plant cells. Plant J 57: 963–974
Harris N (1979) Endoplasmic reticulum in developing seeds of Vicia faba: a
high voltage electron microscope study. Planta 146: 63–69
Harris N, Oparka K (1983) Connections between dictyosomes, ER and
GERL in cotyledons of mung bean (Vigna radiata L.). Protoplasma 114:
93–102
Hawes C (2012) The ER/Golgi interface: is there anything in-between.
Front Plant Sci 3: 73
Hawes C, Osterrieder A, Hummel E, Sparkes I (2008) The plant ER-Golgi
interface. Trafﬁc 9: 1571–1580
Hepler PK (1981) The structure of the endoplasmic reticulum revealed by os-
mium tetroxide-potassium ferricyanide staining. Eur J Cell Biol 26: 102–111
Hughes H, Budnik A, Schmidt K, Palmer KJ, Mantell J, Noakes C,
Johnson A, Carter DA, Verkade P, Watson P, et al (2009) Organisation
of human ER-exit sites: requirements for the localisation of Sec16 to
transitional ER. J Cell Sci 122: 2924–2934
Hughson FM (2010) Copy coats: COPI mimics clathrin and COPII. Cell 142:
19–21
Hummel E, Schmickl R, Hinz G, Hillmer S, Robinson DG (2007) Brefeldin
A action and recovery in Chlamydomonas are rapid and involve fusion
and ﬁssion of Golgi cisternae. Plant Biol (Stuttg) 9: 489–501
Ito Y, Uemura T, Nakano A (2014) Formation and maintenance of the Golgi
apparatus in plant cells. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol 310: 221–287
Ito Y, Uemura T, Shoda K, Fujimoto M, Ueda T, Nakano A (2012) cis-
Golgi proteins accumulate near the ER exit sites and act as the scaffold
for Golgi regeneration after brefeldin A treatment in tobacco BY-2 cells.
Mol Biol Cell 23: 3203–3214
Johnson A, Bhattacharya N, Hanna M, Pennington JG, Schuh AL, Wang
L, Otegui MS, Stagg SM, Audhya A (2015) TFG clusters COPII-coated
transport carriers and promotes early secretory pathway organization.
EMBO J 34: 811–827
Juniper BE, Hawes CR, Horne JC (1982) The relationships between the
dictyosomes and the forms of endoplasmic reticulum in plant cell with
different export programmes. Bot Gaz 143: 135–145
Kang BH, Staehelin LA (2008) ER-to-Golgi transport by COPII vesicles in
Arabidopsis involves a ribosome-excluding scaffold that is transferred
with the vesicles to the Golgi matrix. Protoplasma 234: 51–64
Kurokawa K, Ishii M, Suda Y, Ichihara A, Nakano A (2013) Live cell vi-
sualization of Golgi membrane dynamics by super-resolution confocal
live imaging microscopy. Methods Cell Biol 118: 235–242
Kurokawa K, Okamoto M, Nakano A (2014) Contact of cis-Golgi with ER
exit sites executes cargo capture and delivery from the ER. Nat Commun
5: 3653
Langhans M, Hawes C, Hillmer S, Hummel E, Robinson DG (2007) Golgi
regeneration after brefeldin A treatment in BY-2 cells entails stack en-
largement and cisternal growth followed by division. Plant Physiol 145:
527–538
Langhans M, Meckel T, Kress A, Lerich A, Robinson DG (2012) ERES (ER
exit sites) and the “secretory unit concept”. J Microsc 247: 48–59
Latijnhouwers M, Hawes C, Carvalho C (2005) Holding it all together?
Candidate proteins for the plant Golgi matrix. Curr Opin Plant Biol 8:
632–639
Lerich A, Hillmer S, Langhans M, Scheuring D, van Bentum P, Robinson
DG (2012) ER import sites and their relationship to ER exit sites: a new
model for bidirectional ER-Golgi transport in higher plants. Front Plant
Sci 3: 143
Losev E, Reinke CA, Jellen J, Strongin DE, Bevis BJ, Glick BS (2006) Golgi
maturation visualized in living yeast. Nature 441: 1002–1006
Majoul I, Sohn K, Wieland FT, Pepperkok R, Pizza M, Hillemann J,
Söling HD (1998) KDEL receptor (Erd2p)-mediated retrograde transport
of the cholera toxin A subunit from the Golgi involves COPI, p23, and
the COOH terminus of Erd2p. J Cell Biol 143: 601–612
Martinière A, Desbrosses G, Sentenac H, Paris N (2013) Development and
properties of genetically encoded pH sensors in plants. Front Plant Sci 4:
523
Matheson LA, Hanton SL, Rossi M, Latijnhouwers M, Stefano G, Renna
L, Brandizzi F (2007) Multiple roles of ARF1 in plant cells include
spatially-regulated recruitment of coatomer and elements of the Golgi
matrix. Plant Physiol 143: 1615–1627
Matsuoka K, Orci L, Amherdt M, Bednarek SY, Hamamoto S, Schekman R,
Yeung T (1998) COPII-coated vesicle formation reconstituted with puriﬁed coat
proteins and chemically deﬁned liposomes. Cell 93: 263–275
Matsuura-Tokita K, Takeuchi M, Ichihara A, Mikuriya K, Nakano A
(2006) Live imaging of yeast Golgi cisternal maturation. Nature 441:
1007–1010
Miller EA, Schekman R (2013) COPII: a ﬂexible vesicle formation system.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 25: 420–427
Mironov AA (2014) ER-Golgi transport could occur in the absence of COPII
vesicles. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15: 1
Mogelsvang S, Gomez-Ospina N, Soderholm J, Glick BS, Staehelin LA
(2003) Tomographic evidence for continuous turnover of Golgi cisternae
in Pichia pastoris. Mol Biol Cell 14: 2277–2291
Mollenhauer HH, Morré DJ, Vanderwoude WJ (1976) Endoplasmic
reticulum-Golgi apparatus associations in maize root tips. Mikroskopie
31: 257–272
Montezinos JC, Pastor-Cantizano N, Robinson DG, Marcote MJ, Aniento
F (2014) Arabidopsis p24d5 and p24d9 facilitate COPI-dependent Golgi-to-ER
transport of the K/HDEL receptor ERD2. Plant J 80: 1014–1030
Nakano A (2002) Spinning-disk confocal microscopy: a cutting-edge tool
for imaging of membrane trafﬁc. Cell Struct Funct 27: 349–355
Nakano A, Luini A (2010) Passage through the Golgi. Curr Opin Cell Biol
22: 471–478
Nebenführ A, Gallagher LA, Dunahay TG, Frohlick JA, Mazurkiewicz
AM, Meehl JB, Staehelin LA (1999) Stop-and-go movements of plant
Golgi stacks are mediated by the acto-myosin system. Plant Physiol 121:
1127–1142
Novick P, Field C, Schekman R (1980) Identiﬁcation of 23 complementa-
tion groups required for post-translational events in the yeast secretory
pathway. Cell 21: 205–215
Oka T, Nakano A (1994) Inhibition of GTP hydrolysis by Sar1p causes
accumulation of vesicles that are a functional intermediate of the ER-to-
Golgi transport in yeast. J Cell Biol 124: 425–434
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
405
Vesicles or Tubes

Okamoto M, Kurokawa K, Matsuura-Tokita K, Saito C, Hirata R, Nakano
A (2012) High-curvature domains of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are
important for the organization of ER exit sites in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
J Cell Sci 125: 3412–3420
Osterrieder A (2012) Tales of tethers and tentacles: golgins in plants. J
Microsc 247: 68–77
Osterrieder A, Hummel E, Carvalho CM, Hawes C (2010) Golgi membrane
dynamics after induction of a dominant-negative mutant Sar1 GTPase in
tobacco. J Exp Bot 61: 405–422
Parker ML, Hawes CR (1982) The Golgi apparatus in developing endo-
sperm of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.). Planta 154: 277–283
Paroutis P, Touret N, Grinstein S (2004) The pH of the secretory pathway:
measurement, determinants, and regulation. Physiology (Bethesda) 19: 207–215
Phillipson BA, Pimpl P, daSilva LL, Crofts AJ, Taylor JP, Movafeghi A,
Robinson DG, Denecke J (2001) Secretory bulk ﬂow of soluble proteins
is efﬁcient and COPII dependent. Plant Cell 13: 2005–2020
Pimpl P, Movafeghi A, Coughlan S, Denecke J, Hillmer S, Robinson DG
(2000) In situ localization and in vitro induction of plant COPI-coated
vesicles. Plant Cell 12: 2219–2236
Ritzenthaler C, Nebenführ A, Movafeghi A, Stussi-Garaud C, Behnia L,
Pimpl P, Staehelin LA, Robinson DG (2002) Reevaluation of the effects
of brefeldin A on plant cells using tobacco Bright Yellow 2 cells ex-
pressing Golgi-targeted green ﬂuorescent protein and COPI antisera.
Plant Cell 14: 237–261
Robinson DG, Herranz MC, Bubeck J, Pepperkok R, Ritzenthaler C
(2007) Membrane dynamics in the early secretory pathway. Crit Rev
Plant Sci 26: 199–225
Runions J, Brach T, Kühner S, Hawes C (2006) Photoactivation of GFP
reveals protein dynamics within the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.
J Exp Bot 57: 43–50
Sato K, Nakano A (2004) Reconstitution of coat protein complex II (COPII)
vesicle formation from cargo-reconstituted proteoliposomes reveals the
potential role of GTP hydrolysis by Sar1p in protein sorting. J Biol Chem
279: 1330–1335
Sato K, Nakano A (2005) Dissection of COPII subunit-cargo assembly and
disassembly kinetics during Sar1p-GTP hydrolysis. Nat Struct Mol Biol
12: 167–174
Sato K, Sato M, Nakano A (2001) Rer1p, a retrieval receptor for endo-
plasmic reticulum membrane proteins, is dynamically localized to the
Golgi apparatus by coatomer. J Cell Biol 152: 935–944
Schnepf E, Christ P (1980) Unusual transfer cells in the epithelium of the
nectaries of Asclepias curassavica L. Protoplasma 105: 135–148
Schoberer J, Liebminger E, Vavra U, Veit C, Castilho A, Dicker M,
Maresch D, Altmann F, Hawes C, Botchway SW, et al (2014) The
transmembrane domain of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I is the key
determinant for its Golgi subcompartmentation. Plant J 80: 809–822
Schoberer J, Runions J, Steinkellner H, Strasser R, Hawes C, Osterrieder
A (2010) Sequential depletion and acquisition of proteins during Golgi
stack disassembly and reformation. Trafﬁc 11: 1429–1444
Sieben C, Mikosch M, Brandizzi F, Homann U (2008) Interaction of the K+-
channel KAT1 with the coat protein complex II coat component Sec24 depends
on a di-acidic endoplasmic reticulum export motif. Plant J 56: 997–1006
Sparkes I, Runions J, Hawes C, Grifﬁng L (2009a) Movement and re-
modeling of the endoplasmic reticulum in nondividing cells of tobacco
leaves. Plant Cell 21: 3937–3949
Sparkes IA, Frigerio L, Tolley N, Hawes C (2009b) The plant endoplasmic
reticulum: a cell-wide web. Biochem J 423: 145–155
Sparkes IA, Ketelaar T, de Ruijter NC, Hawes C (2009c) Grab a Golgi:
laser trapping of Golgi bodies reveals in vivo interactions with the en-
doplasmic reticulum. Trafﬁc 10: 567–571
Stefano G, Hawes C, Brandizzi F (2014) ER: the key to the highway. Curr
Opin Plant Biol 22: 30–38
Stefano G, Renna L, Chatre L, Hanton SL, Moreau P, Hawes C, Brandizzi
F (2006) In tobacco leaf epidermal cells, the integrity of protein export
from the endoplasmic reticulum and of ER export sites depends on ac-
tive COPI machinery. Plant J 46: 95–110
Suda Y, Nakano A (2012) The yeast Golgi apparatus. Trafﬁc 13: 505–510
Szul T, Sztul E (2011) COPII and COPI trafﬁc at the ER-Golgi interface.
Physiology 26: 348–354
Tabata KV, Sato K, Ide T, Nishizaka T, Nakano A, Noji H (2009) Visu-
alization of cargo concentration by COPII minimal machinery in a pla-
nar lipid membrane. EMBO J 28: 3279–3289
Takagi J, Renna L, Takahashi H, Koumoto Y, Tamura K, Stefano G, Fukao Y,
Kondo M, Nishimura M, Shimada T, et al (2013) MAIGO5 functions in
protein export from Golgi-associated endoplasmic reticulum exit sites in
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 25: 4658–4675
Takeuchi M, Ueda T, Sato K, Abe H, Nagata T, Nakano A (2000) A
dominant negative mutant of sar1 GTPase inhibits protein transport
from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus in tobacco and
Arabidopsis cultured cells. Plant J 23: 517–525
Takeuchi M, Ueda T, Yahara N, Nakano A (2002) Arf1 GTPase plays roles
in the protein trafﬁc between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi
apparatus in tobacco and Arabidopsis cultured cells. Plant J 31: 499–515
Tanaka Y, Nishimura K, Kawamukai M, Oshima A, Nakagawa T (2013) Re-
dundant function of two Arabidopsis COPII components, AtSec24B and At-
Sec24C, is essential for male and female gametogenesis. Planta 238: 561–575
Tartakoff AM (2002) George Emil Palade: charismatic virtuoso of cell biology.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3: 871–876
Viotti C, Bubeck J, Stierhof YD, Krebs M, Langhans M, van den Berg W,
van Dongen W, Richter S, Geldner N, Takano J, et al (2010) Endocytic
and secretory trafﬁc in Arabidopsis merge in the trans-Golgi network/
early endosome, an independent and highly dynamic organelle. Plant
Cell 22: 1344–1357
Wei T, Wang A (2008) Biogenesis of cytoplasmic membranous vesicles for
plant potyvirus replication occurs at endoplasmic reticulum exit sites in
a COPI- and COPII-dependent manner. J Virol 82: 12252–12264
Wilson DW, Lewis MJ, Pelham HR (1993) pH-dependent binding of KDEL
to its receptor in vitro. J Biol Chem 268: 7465–7468
Witte K, Schuh AL, Hegermann J, Sarkeshik A, Mayers JR, Schwarze K,
Yates JR III, Eimer S, Audhya A (2011) TFG-1 function in protein se-
cretion and oncogenesis. Nat Cell Biol 13: 550–558
Yang YD, Elamawi R, Bubeck J, Pepperkok R, Ritzenthaler C, Robinson
DG (2005) Dynamics of COPII vesicles and the Golgi apparatus in cul-
tured Nicotiana tabacum BY-2 cells provides evidence for transient as-
sociation of Golgi stacks with endoplasmic reticulum exit sites. Plant
Cell 17: 1513–1531
Zeuschner D, Geerts WJ, van Donselaar E, Humbel BM, Slot JW, Koster
AJ, Klumperman J (2006) Immuno-electron tomography of ER exit sites
reveals the existence of free COPII-coated transport carriers. Nat Cell
Biol 8: 377–383
406
Plant Physiol. Vol. 168, 2015
Robinson et al.
